Taiwan suspects that a Chinese-owned cargo vessel damaged an undersea cable near its northeastern coast on Friday, in an alleged act of sabotage that highlights the vulnerabilities of Taipei’s offshore communications infrastructure.
The ship is owned by a Hong Kong-registered company whose director is Chinese, the Financial Times reported on Sunday.
An unidentified Taiwanese official cited in the report described the case as sabotage.
Photo: Screengrab from the Coast Guard Administration’s Facebook page
The incident followed another Chinese vessel’s suspected involvement in the breakages of data cables in the Baltic Sea in November last year. While fishing trawlers are known to sometimes damage such equipment, nation states have also been accused of deliberate sabotage, although it can be difficult to prove.
“This is why Taiwan needs to build its telecommunications resilience, and strengthen its situation awareness in the surrounding waters,” Institute for National Defense and Security Research postdoctoral researcher Hsu Chih-hsiang (許智翔) said. “Otherwise, the system would be easily undermined, and it would be difficult to hold the suspect accountable.”
China’s Taiwan Affairs Office did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Previously, the Coast Guard Administration (CGA) named Cameroon-flagged Shunxing 39 as the suspected offender without identifying its ownership.
Officers tried, but were unable to board the vessel for investigation due to rough weather, the CGA said.
The damage did not affect connection, because data were immediately rerouted to other cables, Chunghwa Telecom said in a statement on Saturday.
The company co-owns the cable system along with AT&T of the US and regional operators including Japan’s Nippon Telegraph & Telephone and China Telecom, the Financial Times said.
Taiwan has asked South Korea for help with the investigation, as the ship is due to arrive in Busan in the coming days, it said.
The integrity of undersea cables has been a rising security concern in Taiwan. As recent as in 2023, telecommunication services in Lienchiang County (Matsu) were disrupted for months after Chinese fishing vessels cut the cables.
To back up connections in the event of a failure, the Taiwan Space Agency in 2023 said it intends to launch its first self-made low Earth orbit communications satellite next year and at least one more by 2028.
MODERATE TYPHOON: Localized heavy rain is forecast to hit central and southern Taiwan, the CWA said, adding that the storm would likely move away on Saturday A sea warning for Typhoon Saudel, which shifted to a more northerly track as it approached Taiwan, is likely early today, the Central Weather Administration (CWA) said yesterday. As of 2pm yesterday, the center of typhoon was about 630km northeast of Taipei, moving west-northwest at 14kph with maximum wind gusts of up to 162kph, CWA data showed. Saudel is a moderate typhoon and is expected to weaken as it nears Taiwan due to atmospheric and ocean conditions, CWA forecaster Lin Po-tung (林伯東) said. A sea warning indicates hazardous typhoon conditions in waters surrounding Taiwan within 24 hours, Lin said. The storm is forecast to
A Straits Exchange Foundation official today warned that yielding to political pressure in exchange for access to China’s entertainment industry rarely ends well, amid rumors that China is seeking to lure Taiwanese K-pop star Chou Tzu-yu (周子瑜). Chou, more commonly known as Tzuyu, is the only Taiwanese member of the girl group Twice. Her contract with JYP Entertainment is set to expire at the end of this year, and there have been widespread reports that she would not renew it. She is reportedly planning to pursue solo activities under her parents’ agency, Yu Hai Entertainment (瑜海娛樂), although China has also reportedly offered
China is urging its citizens to evacuate Eswatini and warning others not to visit the tiny African kingdom over what it said were safety concerns and scamming risks in Taiwan’s last remaining diplomatic partner on the continent. In a post on WeChat, the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ Department of Consular Affairs described Eswatini’s security situation as “complex,” with crimes involving online fraud and illegal gambling “rampant” and the public-security and safety risk “extremely high.” “Chinese citizens and institutions currently in the country are urged to evacuate or relocate to relatively safer areas — such as South Africa — as soon as
A tropical depression near Hainan that was once Typhoon Saudel may once again strengthen into a tropical storm, the Central Weather Administration (CWA) said yesterday, but a sea warning for waters around Taiwan is unlikely. CWA forecaster Huang En-hung (黃恩鴻) said that Saudel would return to being a weak tropical storm by late yesterday or early this morning. However, as the storm is to gradually weaken again and would head toward China’s Guangdong Province away from Taiwan, the chances that it would affect Taiwan enough for the CWA to issue a sea warning are relatively low,
