
An Intensified Approach to Combatting the Islamic State
AN INTENSIFIED APPROACH TO 
COMBATTING THE ISLAMIC STATE
By Michèle Flournoy and Richard Fontaine
AUGUST 2015 | POLICY BRIEF
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Michèle Flournoy is Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer of the Center for a New American Security 
(CNAS). From February 2009 to February 2012 she served as the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy.
Richard Fontaine is the President of CNAS. He served as a Senior Advisor and Senior Fellow at CNAS from 
2009-2012 and previously as foreign policy advisor to Senator John McCain.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank CNAS colleagues Loren DeJonge Schulman, Ilan Goldenberg, Nick Heras, and 
Vance Serchuk for their internal reviews, as well as Melody Cook and Maura McCarthy for the design and 
editing of this report.
This policy brief originally took shape as a paper for the Aspen Strategy Group (ASG). It will be published by 
the ASG in fall 2015 as part of a collection of papers on the challenges posed by violent extremism.
| 1
C N A S . O R G
In the 11 months since President Barack Obama 
committed the United States to “degrade and 
ultimately destroy” the so-called Islamic State of 
Iraq and al Sham (ISIS), the group has expanded its 
international reach, metastasized to form offshoots 
across multiple regions, and increased its perceived 
momentum.1 Although U.S. government officials 
cite a reduction in the overall size of the group’s 
sanctuary in Iraq and Syria and the killing of thou-
sands of ISIS fighters, the fall of Ramadi and much 
of Anbar province to the Islamic State served as a 
wakeup call that current efforts to counter ISIS are 
not adequate to the task.2 Meanwhile, the threat 
posed by the terrorist group to Americans at home 
and abroad appears to be growing as ISIS-inspired 
individuals conduct attacks targeting Westerners 
around the globe, including here in the United 
States. And the U.S. intelligence community 
reportedly assesses that despite almost a year of 
airstrikes, the Islamic State remains no weaker and 
no smaller in number than it was at the campaign’s 
outset.3
While President Obama has articulated a fairly 
comprehensive strategy against ISIS, the United 
States and the 60-nation coalition it has formed 
to fight ISIS have not translated the president’s 
words into an effective campaign on the ground. 
The military dimensions of the strategy have been 
under-resourced, while many of the non-military 
lines of operation remain underdeveloped. 
This policy brief explores the threat posed by the 
Islamic State, assesses the administration’s efforts 
to date, and offers recommendations for the United 
States and its partners to make their efforts to 
counter and ultimately destroy ISIS more effective. 
AN INTENSIFIED APPROACH TO 
COMBATTING THE ISLAMIC STATE
By Michèle Flournoy and Richard Fontaine
A U G U S T 2 0 1 5 | An Intensified Approach to Combatting the Islamic State
2 |
and Anbar, the group poses a grave threat to other 
parts of the country; currently, for instance, more 
than 40 percent of Iraqi security forces are assigned 
to the Baghdad Operations Command, an indica-
tion of the government’s fear for its capital.9 
While ISIS has suffered recent setbacks in both 
Iraq and Syria, its presence elsewhere is growing. 
The group has established a haven in Libya and 
the Sinai Peninsula and is attempting to estab-
lish footholds throughout the Middle East, in the 
Caucasus, Southeast Asia, Afghanistan, Nigeria, 
and elsewhere. Its ambitions – and the scope of 
its threat – appear to grow along with its capacity 
and reach. Driven in part by a sense of competi-
tion with al Qaeda, the threat posed by the Islamic 
State to the United States may grow over time as it 
becomes increasingly entrenched in more places 
and as it attracts and trains a growing number of 
sophisticated fighters. 
THE ISIS THREAT 
The Islamic State is at once a terrorist organization, 
a proto-state, and an ideological movement. In its 
effort to establish a caliphate and inspire Muslims 
around the world to join its cause, the group com-
bines extreme violence, savvy use of social media, 
a jihadist narrative, an ability to seize and hold 
territory, and explicit hostility to the West.4 Unlike 
al Qaeda – which maintains strict criteria and 
protocols for membership, asserts centralized con-
trol, and focuses on conducting carefully planned, 
spectacular attacks – the Islamic State has adopted 
a “let a thousand flowers bloom” approach that 
invites geographically-dispersed, self-proclaimed 
affiliates and inspires uncoordinated attacks. 
Its hallmark attack outside the Middle East has 
thus far been of the “lone-wolf” variety. The 
Islamic State has called on sympathizers to attack 
Westerners and their property wherever they can 
be found. Of the 11 attacks that occurred in the 
West between May 2014 and February 2015, 10 
were carried out by individuals.5 ISIS has carried 
out or inspired attacks in Tunisia, Kuwait, Egypt, 
Saudi Arabia, Canada, Australia, France, Denmark, 
and other countries, including the United States.6 
The threat to the homeland appears to be grow-
ing: After an Islamic State-inspired attack in 
Texas in May, the FBI reported foiling several July 
4th-related plots in what its director described as 
“crowd sourcing terrorism.”7 Future attacks may 
not be limited to lone-wolf efforts; one counterter-
rorism analyst the authors talked to suggested that 
“ISIS is just one Mohammed Atta away from a 9/11-
type attack in the United States.”
In Syria and Iraq, some 22,000 foreign fighters 
from 100 different countries have joined the Islamic 
State,8 thousands of whom hold Western passports 
enabling them to travel freely within and between 
Europe and the United States. And ISIS’ threat to 
Iraq’s stability is clear. In addition to seizing Mosul 
IN SYRIA AND IRAQ, SOME 22,000 FOREIGN 
FIGHTERS FROM 100 DIFFERENT COUNTRIES 
HAVE JOINED THE ISLAMIC STATE, 
THOUSANDS OF WHOM HOLD WESTERN 
PASSPORTS ENABLING THEM TO TRAVEL 
FREELY WITHIN AND BETWEEN EUROPE AND 
THE UNITED STATES.
| 3
C N A S . O R G
IN SYRIA AND IRAQ, SOME 22,000 FOREIGN 
FIGHTERS FROM 100 DIFFERENT COUNTRIES 
HAVE JOINED THE ISLAMIC STATE, 
THOUSANDS OF WHOM HOLD WESTERN 
PASSPORTS ENABLING THEM TO TRAVEL 
FREELY WITHIN AND BETWEEN EUROPE AND 
THE UNITED STATES.
IN PRACTICE, AMERICAN EFFORTS TO COMBAT 
THE ISLAMIC STATE THUS FAR CONVEY A 
SENSE OF CREEPING INCREMENTALISM.
U.S. STRATEGY TO COUNTER ISIS: 
STRONG IN THEORY, INADEQUATE IN 
PRACTICE
Despite repeated charges that his administration 
lacks a strategy, President Obama has on several 
occasions articulated the lines of effort the United 
States is pursuing to combat the Islamic State. Over 
the past year, the administration has assembled a 
60-nation coalition to conduct a long-term, multi-
dimensional campaign to defeat ISIS. The key 
elements of this campaign include:
• The deployment of U.S. and coalition military 
teams to train and equip local forces in Iraq and 
from Syria and the provision of air support to 
help the Iraqi security forces (ISF) and Kurdish 
peshmerga push ISIS out of key terrain it has 
occupied in Iraq;
• Airstrikes in both Iraq and Syria against ISIS 
senior leaders, infrastructure, fighting positions, 
convoys, equipment, and oil and gas facilities 
that provide the group with a source of revenue; 
• Information sharing with partners to help them 
strengthen border security to stem the flow of 
foreign fighters into Syria and Iraq and then 
back to their home countries; 
• Multilateral cooperation to track and disrupt 
illicit financing of ISIS; 
• Diplomatic efforts to press Iraqi Prime Minister 
Haider al-Abadi to build a more inclusive cen-
tral government that represents and serves all 
Iraqis – Shia, Sunni, and Kurd – and devolves 
more authority and resources to the provinces; 
• Discussions with partners regarding a negoti-
ated transition to a post-Assad government in 
Syria;
• Efforts to discredit ISIS’ narrative and counter 
its propaganda online; and 
• Measures to strengthen U.S. homeland security 
to prevent ISIS attacks.
In principle, all of these elements must be part of 
an effective American strategy to combat ISIS, but 
in practice the whole has been less than the sum 
of the parts. Many of these efforts remain more 
aspirational than real. In some cases, they have 
been woefully under-resourced; in other cases, the 
president’s rhetoric has not been translated into 
effective programs and actions.
In practice, American efforts to combat the 
Islamic State thus far convey a sense of creeping 
incrementalism. In recent weeks, for example, the 
administration announced the dispatch of 450 
additional troops to Iraq – only 50 of which are 
trainers, with the remainder as support – to train 
Iraqi troops, bringing the total U.S. commitment to 
3,550.10 Meanwhile, a year-old DoD training effort 
has yielded fewer than 60 anti-Islamic State fighters 
for deployment in Syria. 
These and other moves simply will not turn the 
tide given ISIS’ size, spread, and momentum. To 
succeed in the president’s ambition of ultimately 
destroying the Islamic State – or at least containing 
ISIS’ gains and rolling them back – a broader and 
more intensive effort is needed.
A U G U S T 2 0 1 5 | An Intensified Approach to Combatting the Islamic State
4 |
TOWARD A MORE ROBUST AND 
EFFECTIVE EFFORT
A more robust campaign to counter ISIS should 
start with intensifying and fully resourcing U.S.-
led efforts in Iraq. To date, the counter-Islamic 
State strategy in Iraq has lacked the urgency and 
resources necessary for success. A re-energized and 
more forward-leaning approach should combine 
the following elements:
• Intensify U.S. diplomacy in support of an inte-
grated political-military plan for Iraq. Iraq 
is the locus of the current U.S. military effort 
against the Islamic State, and the administra-
tion’s strategy of working with and through 
Iraqi forces is the right one to achieve gains 
that are sustainable in the long term. But these 
efforts require better coordination between 
the military and diplomatic lines of effort. An 
integrated political-military plan should include 
stepped-up diplomacy with Baghdad to push for 
greater Sunni inclusion, devolution of author-
ity and resources to provinces such as Anbar, as 
well as the establishment of a national guard as 
a vehicle for Sunni tribal militias to become part 
of the Iraqi security forces. 
Shia party leaders in Baghdad must be made to 
understand two fundamental facts. First, failure 
to adopt more inclusive policies with regard to 
the Sunni population risks the dissolution of 
Iraq as a unitary state. Second, relying predomi-
nantly on Iranian-backed Shia militias to clear 
ISIS from Sunni areas will only further alienate 
the Sunni population and create fertile soil for 
ISIS’ return. Given Iran’s military operations 
and outsized influence in Iraqi politics, Tehran 
will be a major factor in the sustainability of a 
multi-sectarian Iraq. The United States should 
urge Iraqi leaders to make clear to Tehran that 
a zero-sum approach to sectarian conflict in 
Iraq risks the country’s further fragmentation, 
increased ISIS influence, and deeper tension 
with the United States. 
• Intensify U.S. and coalition outreach to and 
support for the Sunni tribes. While Shia-
dominated Iraqi Army units may not have the 
“will to fight” to regain Sunni areas from ISIS, 
Sunni militia would be willing to take up arms 
against ISIS provided two key conditions are 
met. First, they must be convinced that at the 
end of the day Baghdad will provide them with 
more autonomy and resources to govern them-
selves at the provincial level. Second, they must 
believe that the U.S.-led coalition will provide 
them with the military and financial support 
necessary to enable their success against ISIS. 
Both conditions will be difficult to attain given 
the previous Sunni tribal alliance with the 
United States during the Anbar awakening and 
the failure to translate those gains into greater 
Sunni political representation in a federalized 
Iraq. 
Washington should clarify its willingness to 
provide operational support to Sunni tribal 
fighters and redouble its efforts to persuade 
Arab partners, who have largely sat on the side-
lines and watched Iran fill the vacuum in Iraq, 
to provide financial support to Iraq conditioned 
on greater inclusion of its Sunni population.
• Provide arms directly to Sunni tribes and the 
Kurdish peshmerga. The pipeline of weapons 
through Baghdad to the Sunnis and Kurds 
willing to take on the Islamic State has often 
been slow and inadequate, undermining the 
effectiveness of both training and operations 
against ISIS. The United States should speed the 
supply of arms and equipment directly to local 
tribal militia and peshmerga units, while hold-
ing out the prospect that arms will flow through 
Baghdad if and when the central government 
establishes a reliable process for their transfer 
and passes legislation to include these fighters 
WHEN IRAQI UNITS ARE TRAINED, 
EQUIPPED, AND READY FOR COMBAT, U.S. 
MILITARY ADVISORS SHOULD BE ALLOWED 
TO EMBED WITH IRAQI BATTALIONS AND 
ADVISE IRAQI COMMANDERS DURING 
OPERATIONS FROM “THE LAST POINT 
OF CONCEALMENT” – I.E, A PROTECTED 
POSITION CLOSE TO THE FIGHTING.
| 5
C N A S . O R G
WHEN IRAQI UNITS ARE TRAINED, 
EQUIPPED, AND READY FOR COMBAT, U.S. 
MILITARY ADVISORS SHOULD BE ALLOWED 
TO EMBED WITH IRAQI BATTALIONS AND 
ADVISE IRAQI COMMANDERS DURING 
OPERATIONS FROM “THE LAST POINT 
OF CONCEALMENT” – I.E, A PROTECTED 
POSITION CLOSE TO THE FIGHTING.
EMPLOYING MORE U.S. AIR ASSETS 
BASED IN IRAQ OR NEIGHBORING 
PARTNER COUNTRIES, RATHER THAN ON 
DISTANT AIRCRAFT CARRIERS, WOULD 
ENABLE FAR MORE STRIKES PER DAY IN 
BOTH IRAQ AND SYRIA.
in the Iraqi security forces. Providing this 
assistance directly could also incentivize Shia 
politicians in Baghdad, who have thus far been 
reluctant to pass legislation establishing an Iraqi 
National Guard, to support the new law in order 
to ensure these local forces ultimately fall under 
the control of the Iraqi security forces.
• Embed U.S. military advisors at the battalion 
level and allow them to advise Iraqi com-
manders during operations. The Iraqi security 
forces’ will to fight has faltered repeatedly in 
the face of Islamic State advances, and yet it is 
difficult to bolster morale, stiffen backbones, 
or adjust a battle plan from behind the wire at 
a training base. When Iraqi units are trained, 
equipped, and ready for combat, U.S. military 
advisors should be allowed to embed with Iraqi 
battalions and advise Iraqi commanders during 
operations from “the last point of concealment” 
– i.e, a protected position close to the fighting. 
While this would increase the risk to some U.S. 
personnel, it would likely have a marked impact 
on the combat effectiveness of Iraqi forces bat-
tling ISIS. 
• Intensify the coalition air campaign and 
deploy forward air controllers to call in close 
air support during combat missions. The air 
campaign against the Islamic State has thus 
far been the centerpiece of U.S. strategy, yet as 
currently conducted it is unlikely to turn the 
tide. Since August 2014, the U.S.-led coalition 
has conducted over 2,600 air strikes against ISIS 
targets in Iraq and over 1,600 in Syria. But the 
intensity of the air campaign has been far less 
than in previous air campaigns and has been 
somewhat hampered by a lack of both intel-
ligence on ISIS targets and nearby basing to 
allow more responsive strikes on emergent or 
fleeting targets. Employing more U.S. air assets 
based in Iraq or neighboring partner countries, 
rather than on distant aircraft carriers, would 
enable far more strikes per day in both Iraq and 
Syria. Turkey’s recent decision to open Incirlik 
air base for U.S. aircraft conducting opera-
tions against ISIS is an important step in this 
regard. Authorizing U.S. forward air control-
lers to accompany Iraqi forces into the fight to 
identify targets and call in close air support for 
Iraqi units under fire would also make those 
forces far more effective. This step, and embed-
ding U.S. combat advisors, would require some 
increase in the number of U.S. support forces in 
Iraq to ensure the availability of capabilities for 
medical evacuations, combat search and rescue, 
and a quick reaction force.
A U G U S T 2 0 1 5 | An Intensified Approach to Combatting the Islamic State
6 |
At the same time, the United States should also inten-
sify its efforts to counter ISIS in Syria. Specifically, the 
United States should:
• Eliminate key restrictions on aid to the Syrian 
opposition. The Islamic State will pose an endur-
ing threat to Iraq and other countries as long as 
it enjoys a safe haven and base of operations in 
Syria. The continued leadership of Bashar al-Assad 
remains the fuel that fires the sense of Sunni disaf-
fection in Syria and pulls that population toward 
its purported Islamic State protectors. Current U.S. 
policy requires oppositionists seeking training to 
target only the Islamic State and not the Assad 
regime. It is small wonder that the DoD program 
has trained just 60 potential fighters.
The Department of Defense training mission 
should cease its insistence on the Islamic State as 
the sole target and begin training and equipping 
moderate opposition fighters who wish to take 
on the Assad regime as well. It should also begin 
providing anti-aircraft artillery (excluding shoul-
der-fired surface-to-air missiles) to the moderate 
opposition to counter the regime’s continued use 
of barrel bombs against the civilian population. As 
part of this effort, the United States should leverage 
its increased commitment to persuade Gulf states 
and Turkey to back the American effort rather than 
to support Jaish al Fatah or other extremist groups 
in Syria.
The United States should seek to hasten the depar-
ture of Assad from power but retain the basic 
structures of government and avoid the disintegra-
tion of the Syrian state. This is a difficult and risky 
objective, but the alternatives promise endless 
bloodshed and fuel for ISIS’ continued growth. 
Moving U.S. policy in this direction would allow 
Washington to better coordinate with regional 
states, including Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar, 
that wish to more vigorously oppose Assad. It may 
also induce Turkey to enhance its border controls 
to better prevent the flow of foreign fighters into 
Syria. 
• Set the conditions before attempting a settle-
ment in Syria. A flurry of rumors suggests 
that, following the agreement on Iran’s nuclear 
program, the administration may attempt a 
multilateral peace negotiation aimed at ending 
the Syrian civil war. Yet no political solution will 
be possible so long as the key parties – includ-
ing Assad, the Islamic State, and other jihadist 
groups – believe that they can win. The lack of 
serious U.S. engagement to date means that it 
would have little leverage in such a negotiation if 
it began tomorrow, and the parties Washington 
wishes to see prevail – moderate rebels – are in 
fact the weakest on the field. 
Setting the conditions would first and foremost 
mean strengthening the elements in Syria who 
are best placed to govern a post-Assad Syria and 
building support among the Gulf partners and 
Turkey for such a force. It would also include 
raising the costs for Iran both in Syria and across 
the region through more aggressive use of mili-
tary and intelligence tools – jointly with Arab 
partner militaries – to counter Iran’s surrogates 
and proxies. And it would mean engaging in 
a dialogue with Iranian officials to detect any 
changes in their calculus with respect to Assad 
and his regime’s future.
• Employ a “tourniquet strategy” around Syria. 
While the United States takes more affirmative 
steps to achieve an acceptable endgame in Syria, 
CURRENT U.S. POLICY REQUIRES 
OPPOSITIONISTS SEEKING TRAINING TO 
TARGET ONLY THE ISLAMIC STATE AND NOT 
THE ASSAD REGIME. IT IS SMALL WONDER 
THAT THE DOD PROGRAM HAS TRAINED JUST 
60 POTENTIAL FIGHTERS.
| 7
C N A S . O R G
it should also lead the coalition in a collective 
effort to keep the civil war from destabiliz-
ing countries on its borders, especially Turkey, 
Jordan, and Lebanon. Each of these countries is 
being overwhelmed by the largest refugee crisis 
since World War II: More than 4 million refugees 
have left Syria, with 1.8 million going to Turkey, 
nearly 1.2 million in Lebanon, and some 630,000 
in Jordan. These states need more assistance 
from the international community to deal with 
this humanitarian crisis and counter ISIS efforts 
to launch attacks and gain a foothold on their 
territory. The U.S.-led effort should bolster the 
resilience of these border states in the face of 
unprecedented pressure. The reported (and then 
officially denied) plans to establish a “safe zone” 
in Syria along the Turkish border could be a step 
in the right direction, though militarily difficult 
to achieve and defend.
Neither the United States nor the international 
community can afford to focus only on counter-
ing ISIS where it is strongest – in Syria and Iraq. As 
the group seeks to establish affiliates in places as far 
flung as Afghanistan, Libya, Nigeria, and Yemen, the 
United States should seek to prevent it from creating 
additional safe havens from which it can conduct 
attacks. The United States and its partners should:
• Intensify the global campaign against the 
Islamic State. An enhanced strategy that com-
bines military, intelligence, diplomatic, and 
economic efforts will be necessary to prevent 
ISIS from becoming the new al Qaeda – a terror-
ist organization with global reach and ambitions 
to attack Americans at home and abroad. Many 
tools will be familiar from that fight, including 
counter-threat finance, building partnership 
capacity, intelligence sharing, and targeted coun-
terterrorism operations. The United States should 
leverage the tools it has honed and the lessons it 
has learned to keep ISIS from establishing itself 
as a viable terrorist organization in countries 
beyond Syria and Iraq.
• Adopt a conditions-based approach to siz-
ing U.S. forces in Afghanistan for 2016 and 
beyond. In Afghanistan, the Islamic State’s efforts 
to recruit disaffected Taliban fighters and cre-
ate a rival organization offers one more reason 
to abandon the calendar-based withdrawal of 
U.S. forces from that country by the end of 2016. 
Instead, the United States should adopt a more 
forward-looking approach that would keep a 
modest force in place to advise and assist the 
Afghan national security forces and conduct joint 
counterterrorism operations to safeguard both 
countries.
• Counter ISIS’ narrative on social media. ISIS 
reportedly puts out nearly 90,000 messages a day 
on social media outlets, ranging from Facebook 
to Twitter to YouTube to WhatsApp.11 The group 
is highly effective in using the Internet and social 
media to disseminate propaganda, radicalize and 
recruit followers, provide operational support 
to foreign fighters, and inspire “lone wolves” to 
conduct jihad. To date, U.S. and coalition efforts 
to counter ISIS messaging have been inadequate 
and ineffective.
A more coordinated digital effort is needed, one 
that includes not only other countries but also 
key partners in the private sector and nongov-
ernmental organization (NGO) community. This 
IN AFGHANISTAN, THE ISLAMIC STATE’S 
EFFORTS TO RECRUIT DISAFFECTED 
TALIBAN FIGHTERS AND CREATE A RIVAL 
ORGANIZATION OFFERS ONE MORE REASON 
TO ABANDON THE CALENDAR-BASED 
WITHDRAWAL OF U.S. FORCES FROM THAT 
COUNTRY BY THE END OF 2016.
CURRENT U.S. POLICY REQUIRES 
OPPOSITIONISTS SEEKING TRAINING TO 
TARGET ONLY THE ISLAMIC STATE AND NOT 
THE ASSAD REGIME. IT IS SMALL WONDER 
THAT THE DOD PROGRAM HAS TRAINED JUST 
60 POTENTIAL FIGHTERS.
A U G U S T 2 0 1 5 | An Intensified Approach to Combatting the Islamic State
8 |
counter-messaging campaign should include 
efforts to amplify more moderate voices within 
Islam who discredit ISIS’ extremist views and 
calls to violence. It should also disseminate tales 
of disaffected former Islamic State fighters to 
better reveal the reality of ISIS and dissuade 
others from joining. 
While the efforts of partner governments like 
the United Arab Emirates and Tunisia will be 
particularly important, it is imperative that 
the United States also engage key private sec-
tor and NGO partners to bolster their efforts. 
To cite one example, Google regularly reviews 
videos posted on YouTube and removes those 
that show or aim to incite violence. In addition, 
the company has recently connected YouTube 
stars skilled in reaching younger audiences 
with NGOs working to counter ISIS narratives. 
These and other creative approaches should be 
encouraged and supported. 
THE LONG-TERM EFFORT
Beyond these near-term steps to intensify the cam-
paign against ISIS, the United States needs to revisit 
and revitalize efforts that aim to address the condi-
tions that create fertile soil in which violent Islamic 
extremism can take root and grow. On the face of 
it, steps such as empowering more moderate voices 
within Islam and building the resilience of com-
munities at risk of radicalization seem attractive 
and entirely non-controversial. But translating those 
generalities into specific policies and programs can 
quickly become controversial. 
Should the United States press Saudi Arabia to stop 
its export of Wahhabism across the Islamic world? 
Should U.S. leaders openly call for the separation 
of state and religion in the Muslim world? Should 
they give greater priority to addressing the failure of 
states across the Arab world to meet the basic needs 
and address the grievances of substantial segments 
of their populations? Should the United States 
renew its push for democratic reform in the Arab 
world, even among friendly autocracies, or count 
on them to impose stability through repression? 
Should Washington press European allies who have 
failed to integrate Muslim immigrant populations 
into their societies to take a different approach? 
And are American leaders willing to scrutinize 
their country’s own treatment of U.S. Muslim com-
munities and change course where heavy-handed 
surveillance has trumped community engagement 
and alienated the very communities they seek to 
make resilient to radicalization? There are few easy 
answers to these questions, but they are central to 
the long-term effort to combat the Islamic State 
– and the successors and offshoots of it that will 
emerge as long as violent extremism remains an 
attractive ideology to motivated individuals. 
IF THE UNITED STATES HAS LEARNED 
ANYTHING SINCE 9/11, IT SHOULD BE THE 
NEED TO DENY SANCTUARY TO A TERRORIST 
GROUP THAT WREAKS UNSPEAKABLE 
VIOLENCE AND BRUTALITY AGAINST ALL 
EXCEPT THOSE WHO SHARE ITS TORTURED 
WORLDVIEW.
| 9
C N A S . O R G
 * * *
Together, the steps outlined here would mark 
a significant intensification in the campaign 
against the Islamic State in Iraq, Syria, and glob-
ally. They would involve putting a small number 
of U.S. “boots on the ground” and would expose 
American troops to greater risk. Yet the risks 
of inaction are greater still. If the United States 
has learned anything since 9/11, it should be 
the need to deny sanctuary to a terrorist group 
that wreaks unspeakable violence and brutality 
against all except those who share its tortured 
worldview.
Most Americans regret having permitted al 
Qaeda to establish a sanctuary in Afghanistan in 
the 1990s. Years from now, they should not look 
back with regret at this period of time, when the 
Islamic State is creating its own havens. In the 
Middle East and elsewhere, the United States 
has imperfect and disorganized partners, but 
they are partners nonetheless. Now is the time to 
intensify America’s efforts to help lead them in a 
common campaign to defeat the Islamic State.
IF THE UNITED STATES HAS LEARNED 
ANYTHING SINCE 9/11, IT SHOULD BE THE 
NEED TO DENY SANCTUARY TO A TERRORIST 
GROUP THAT WREAKS UNSPEAKABLE 
VIOLENCE AND BRUTALITY AGAINST ALL 
EXCEPT THOSE WHO SHARE ITS TORTURED 
WORLDVIEW.
| 11
C N A S . O R G
ENDNOTES
1. This paper uses the names “Islamic State” and “ISIS” interchangeably.
2. Administration officials report the loss of more than a quarter of the 
populated areas the Islamic State seized in Iraq. See, The White House, Office of 
the Press Secretary, “Remarks by the President on Progress in the Fight Against 
ISIL,” July 6, 2015, https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/07/06/
remarks-president-progress-fight-against-isil.
3. Ken Dilanian, Zeina Karam, and Bassem Mroue, “Despite Bombing, Islamic 
State Is No Weaker Than a Year Ago,” Associated Press, August 1, 2015, http://
www.realclearpolitics.com/articles/2015/08/01/despite_bombing_islamic_
state_is_no_weaker_than_a_year_ago_127626.html. 
4. For useful descriptions of the Islamic State, see, inter alia, Nicholas J. 
Rasmussen, Director, National Counterterrorism Center, “Current Terrorist Threat 
to the United States,” hearing before the Select Committee on Intelligence, 
U.S. Senate, February 12, 2015; Graeme Wood, “What ISIS Really Wants,” The 
Atlantic, March 2015; Audrey Kurth Cronin, “ISIS Is Not a Terrorist Group,” Foreign 
Affairs, (March/April 2015); Brian Fishman, Counterterrorism Research Fellow, 
International Studies Program, New America Foundation, “The Next Decade: 
Aligning Strategy Against the Islamic State,” hearing before the Armed Services 
Committee, U.S. House of Representatives, June 24, 2015; and Linda Robinson, 
Senior International Policy Analyst, RAND Corporation, “An Assessment of the 
Counter-ISIL Campaign,” hearing before the Armed Services Committee, U.S. 
House of Representatives, June 24, 2015.
5. Rasmussen, “Current Terrorist Threat to the United States.”
6. Ibid. 
7. Julia Edwards and Mark Hosenball, “FBI says it thwarted Islamic State-inspired 
July 4 attacks,” Reuters, July 9, 2015.
8. Jeh Johnson, Secretary of Homeland Security, remarks to the United Nations 
Interior Ministerial Security Council Briefing on Countering Foreign Terrorist 
Fighters, May 29, 2015, http://www.dhs.gov/news/2015/05/29/remarks-
secretary-homeland-security-jeh-charles-johnson-united-nations-interior.
9. Robinson, hearing before the Armed Services Committee.
10. Ashton Carter, Secretary of Defense, “Statement on Counter-ISIL,” testimony 
to the Armed Services Committee, U.S. Senate, July 7, 2015, http://www.
defense.gov/Speeches/Speech.aspx?SpeechID=1956. 
11. Eric Schmitt, “U.S. Intensifies Effort to Blunt ISIS’ Message,” The New York 
Times, February 16, 2015.
A U G U S T 2 0 1 5 | An Intensified Approach to Combatting the Islamic State
12 |
About the Center for a 
New American Security
The mission of the Center for a New American 
Security (CNAS) is to develop strong, pragmatic 
and principled national security and defense 
policies. Building on the expertise and 
experience of its staff and advisors, CNAS 
engages policymakers, experts and the public 
with innovative, fact-based research, ideas 
and analysis to shape and elevate the national 
security debate. A key part of our mission is to 
inform and prepare the national security leaders 
of today and tomorrow.
CNAS is located in Washington, and was 
established in February 2007 by co-founders 
Kurt M. Campbell and Michèle A. Flournoy. 
CNAS is a 501(c)3 tax-exempt nonprofit 
organization. Its research is independent and 
non-partisan. CNAS does not take institutional 
positions on policy issues. Accordingly, all views, 
positions, and conclusions expressed in this 
publication should be understood to be solely 
those of the authors. 
© 2015 Center for a New American Security.
All rights reserved.
Center for a New American Security
1152 15th Street, NW 
Suite 950 
Washington, DC 20005
TEL 202.457.9400 
FAX 202.457.9401 
EMAIL info@cnas.org 
www.cnas.org
Production Notes
Soy ink is a helpful component in paper recycling. It helps in this 
process because the soy ink can be removed more easily than 
regular ink and can be taken out of paper during the de-inking 
process of recycling. This allows the recycled paper to have less 
damage to its paper fibers and have a brighter appearance. 
The waste that is left from the soy ink during the de-inking 
process is not hazardous and it can be treated easily through 
the development of modern processes.
Paper recycling is reprocessing waste paper fibers back into 
a usable paper product.
1152 15th Street, NW
Suite 950
Washington, DC 20005
Bold. Innovative. Bipartisan.
TEL 202.457.9400
FAX 202.457.9401
EMAIL info@cnas.org
www.cnas.org
Printed on Post-Consumer Recycled paper with Soy Inks
