
S E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2
 
P O L I C Y B R I E F
Asad Under Fire
Five Scenarios for the Future of Syria
By Melissa G. Dalton
The brutal conflict now underway in Syria jeopardizes key strategic interests of the 
United States, but leaves Washington with few 
attractive options to protect them and little leverage 
over the future trajectory of the country. Given 
these challenges, the United States should pursue a 
strategy that mitigates both the short- and long-
term risks to its interests. Other U.S. policies will 
rightly focus on condemning the atrocities of the 
Syrian regime and alleviating the humanitarian 
suffering of the Syrian people. This policy brief 
focuses on threats to U.S. security interests and how 
they might evolve under five different scenarios for 
the future of Syria:
• President Bashar al-Asad is killed, followed by a 
period of conflict
• An opposition-led government takes power 
through a managed transition
• The opposition deposes Asad violently and takes 
control of Syria
• Asad retains power after an extended civil war
• Syria disintegrates along sectarian or religious lines
Eighteen months ago, the best possible result for 
Syria involved the political opposition convincing 
Asad to step down, culminating in a peaceful tran-
sition of power. It is too late for that now, however. 
Despite months of diplomatic efforts, the conflict 
has escalated, weakening Asad’s control over the 
state but strengthening his resolve to stay in power, 
emboldening the opposition and fringe al Qaeda-
inspired radicals, and deepening long-festering 
sectarian divisions. The once-peaceful opposition 
has had little choice but to combat violence with 
violence. Damascus and Aleppo are under siege, 
the number of deaths exceeds 20,000, and hundreds 
of thousands of refugees have fled to neighboring 
countries.1
As the conflict continues to escalate, public debate 
in the United States has focused on specific policies 
to address the current conflict, including arming 
Syrian rebels directly or imposing no-fly zones to 
support the Syrian opposition. Meanwhile, far too 
little attention has been paid to what may happen 
when the conflict ends. Current reports suggest that 
U.S. policymakers are focusing on the prospect of 
a managed transition after Asad falls from power,2 
but this is only one possible outcome. As the 
United States learned so painfully in Iraq, prepar-
ing effectively for the aftermath of conflict requires 
exploring a wide range of possible outcomes, not 
just the ones that Americans prefer. 
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 2CNAS.ORG
U.S. Interests in Syria
Since the future of Syria is uncertain, U.S. lead-
ers must plan for a range of scenarios. This effort 
is vital because the United States has key strategic 
interests at stake:
Preventing the use and proliferation of Syria’s 
chemical weapons. As the conflict escalates, the 
regime’s chemical weapons – which reportedly 
include tons of sarin, mustard gas and VX nerve 
agent – could be used against the Syrian people or 
fall into the hands of terrorists.3 
Preventing the spread of conflict to neighboring 
countries. Syria’s conflict could also cause arms, 
militants and sectarian tensions to spill over into 
neighboring Lebanon, Iraq, Jordan and Turkey 
through Syria’s increasingly porous borders, com-
mon trade routes and familial and tribal ties.4
Minimizing Iranian efforts to foment conflict in 
the region. Iran’s alliance with Syria has enabled 
it to project power into the Levant and support 
Hezbollah in Lebanon and, to a lesser extent, 
Palestinian militant groups, with destabilizing 
effects on countries in the region.5 A new Syrian 
government could be less friendly to Iran and 
constrain Iran’s ability to resupply Hezbollah. This 
could isolate Iran further and reinforce U.S. and 
international efforts to pressure it to accede at the 
nuclear negotiating table. Iran could also feel more 
threatened and – in the absence of the forward 
strategic retaliatory capability in the Levant pro-
vided by its alliance with Syria – more motivated to 
obtain nuclear weapons. 
Preventing al Qaeda-inspired groups from oper-
ating freely in Syria. Al Qaeda-inspired groups 
reportedly are growing in number and increasingly 
involved in Syria’s conflict. These groups could try 
to establish safe havens in parts of the country that 
are not fully controlled by either the regime or the 
opposition.6 
Ensuring Israeli security. An Islamist-dominated 
regime in Damascus could be more antagonistic 
toward Israel, but a new regime that limited its ties 
with Iran and Hezbollah and sought to partner 
more with the West might be more receptive to 
eventually making peace with Israel. Israeli leaders 
are deeply concerned about the security of Syria’s 
chemical weapons as the Syria conflict escalates 
and a potential transition of power looms.7
Of course, these core strategic interests are only 
some of the interests the United States has at stake 
in Syria. The U.S. government also seeks to support 
Syria’s political transition and mitigate humani-
tarian suffering. The United States is encouraging 
elements of the Syrian opposition to create a unified 
transition plan and has pledged to provide more 
than $100 million for humanitarian activities both 
inside Syria and in neighboring countries.8
Although the United States has reportedly provided 
nonlethal assistance to the rebels and has begun 
to facilitate the arming of opposition elements by 
Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Qatar, the U.S. govern-
ment appears reluctant to take a direct combat 
role in Syria, fearing substantial risks that seem 
only more acute in a U.S. presidential election 
year.9 These risks include becoming entangled in 
a prolonged stalemate, hindering U.S. plans for a 
strategic rebalancing toward Asia over the long 
term and ultimately making the situation in Syria 
worse rather than better.10 U.S. military interven-
tion could exacerbate the conflict and embolden al 
Qaeda-inspired groups. It could also lead to a proxy 
war with Iran and Russia, which could undermine 
efforts by the U.N. Security Council to maintain 
international pressure on Iran.11 If substantial U.S. 
military assets were diverted to Syria, fewer forces 
and capabilities would be available for a military 
contingency with Iran, whether triggered by an 
Israeli strike on Iran’s nuclear program or some 
other event.
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 3CNAS.ORG
Five Scenarios for Syria
Each of the scenarios presented below starts with 
a triggering event, followed by a set of possible 
responses by key players, including elements of the 
Asad regime and the Syrian military, the opposi-
tion and outside powers. This set of scenarios for 
Syria’s future is far from exhaustive but attempts to 
identify the most likely trajectories for Syria.
SCENARIO 1: THE SUDDEN DEATH OF ASAD 
This scenario starts with the Syrian opposition or al 
Qaeda militants assassinating Asad.
Key developments:
• Remaining regime members maintain control of the 
majority of state institutions, but uncertainty and 
confusion following Asad’s death allow the oppo-
sition to increasingly challenge the regime. State 
institutions remain largely intact, but the safeguards 
on Syria’s chemical weapons grow weaker.
• The Syrian opposition claims victory after Asad’s 
death but lacks a coherent strategy for a post-
Asad transition.
• Al Qaeda-inspired groups take advantage of the 
period of uncertainty in Syria’s governance, gain-
ing additional ground in key urban centers and 
staging attacks against regime loyalists.
In the confusion following Asad’s death, the 
regime’s control over chemical weapons safeguards 
could slip as remaining regime leaders focus on 
reasserting their authority and preventing the 
regime from collapsing. Rogue opposition fighters 
or militants with insider knowledge could exploit 
this vulnerability to gain control of some of the 
chemical weapons.
Asad’s assassination could be the death knell of 
the current regime and could help galvanize Syria’s 
opposition elements, but conflict probably would 
not end immediately. Syria’s civil war could drag 
on for several more years. Some regime members 
might choose to defect. Although the number of 
Sunnis continuing to support the regime is dwin-
dling, other loyalists might not readily give up 
power, given the long-standing political, economic 
and social links between Alawite, minority and 
Sunni families at the core of the regime.12 
Even if state institutions were to remain largely 
intact, the uncertainty of who would lead Syria’s 
government could diminish their effectiveness. In 
addition, Syria’s military and security forces would 
likely have a difficult time establishing credibil-
ity and trust with the population as the lingering 
regime attempted to govern and enforce law and 
order. Brutal atrocities committed by some mem-
bers of Syria’s military and security forces against 
the rebels and, by some accounts, the Syrian 
population could motivate some Syrians to retaliate 
against the regime.13 Similarly, even if regime loyal-
ists ordered their forces to scale back operations 
against the rebels, Syria’s military and security 
forces would likely have difficulty overcoming their 
suspicions of rebels or perceived rebel sympathizers 
after the past year of intense civil war.14 Even if the 
decapitated regime decided to make peace with the 
rebels, increasing sectarian tensions among the reb-
els might prevent them from sticking to the terms 
of any negotiated settlement.15
Syria’s opposition elements and the international 
community would probably not have enough time 
In the confusion following Asad’s death, 
the regime’s control over chemical weapons 
safeguards could slip as remaining regime 
leaders focus on reasserting their authority 
and preventing the regime from collapsing.
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 4CNAS.ORG
to plan for a political transition and would not have 
resources ready to execute their strategy effectively. 
These gaps could enable regime loyalists to recover 
from the shock of Asad’s death and reenergize their 
pursuit of the rebels. 
Al Qaeda-inspired groups could also exploit the 
likely ensuing frustration, find recruits among 
Syria’s population and operate with impunity as 
Syria’s old and new powerbrokers continued to 
fight on the battlefield and at the negotiating table.16 
These militant groups could also galvanize support 
by claiming responsibility for Asad’s death.
Iran and Russia would likely continue to back 
efforts by regime loyalists to quell the rebellion, but 
the two nations might also adopt a hedging strat-
egy to establish relationships with emerging Syrian 
opposition leaders. Iran might also react to the 
sudden news of Asad’s death by launching proxy 
attacks elsewhere as a show of force.17
SCENARIO 2: MANAGED TRANSITION
In this scenario, Asad and his immediate circle 
depart.
Key developments:
• The majority of the state structure initially 
remains in place, but its capability and credibility 
grow weaker over time.
• With international funds and assistance, the Free 
Syrian Army and major militias decisively defeat 
Asad’s forces in Aleppo and Damascus and con-
solidate gains in other main population centers.
• Military opposition leaders unite with defectors 
and lower-ranking regime officials to form a tran-
sitional government.
• Al Qaeda-inspired groups are marginalized by 
an increasingly unified and credible opposition 
with a political strategy that explicitly includes 
minorities and former regime members.
• Syria’s transitional government controls the 
chemical weapons stockpiles, with international 
advice and support. 
• Low-intensity conflict continues for several years 
in Syria until the opposition achieves a sustain-
able political transition. The flow of refugees 
into neighboring countries eases, and refugees 
gradually return to Syria as security conditions 
improve.
Asad could leave power in several different ways in 
this scenario – including a negotiated settlement 
with the opposition, some form of external inter-
vention (possibly led by Turkey)18 or even a military 
coup.19 Regardless of how Asad departed, a man-
aged transition would rely on senior-level defectors 
from his regime cooperating with Syria’s political 
opposition to create a strategy for political transi-
tion.20 Other opposition members might distrust 
defectors, however, particularly if they were close 
to Asad, which would likely constrain the ability 
of those defectors to lead the opposition’s political 
consolidation and transition efforts. 
No matter how well the opposition managed 
Syria’s political transition, state institutions would 
be weakened not only by months of conflict but 
also by deep-seated fear and mistrust among 
Syria’s population that predate the civil war. 
No matter how well the opposition man-
aged Syria’s political transition, state 
institutions would be weakened not only 
by months of conflict but also by deep-
seated fear and mistrust among Syria’s 
population that predate the civil war. 
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 5CNAS.ORG
Because the Asad regime governed through fear 
and repression, Syrian opposition members who 
have struggled to overthrow that system might 
reject regime institutions unless they were sub-
stantially reformed. This issue may be most acute 
in Syria’s military and security services. Although 
the United States would want to encourage the 
Syrian government to heed the lessons of Iraq by 
not disbanding Syrian military and security ser-
vices, government leaders would need to overhaul 
the entire security sector21 for the population to 
accept these services as legitimate and trustwor-
thy.22 Syrians would probably have to grapple with 
these issues over the long term.
Some former regime officials would undoubtedly 
understand the systems that Syria currently uses to 
safeguard its chemical weapons. The United States 
could help connect those former officials with 
members of the opposition’s security forces and 
could help provide training, advice and assistance 
to store (or even reduce) stockpiles.
Not wanting to risk losing its Levantine partner, 
Iran would likely seek a strong relationship with 
the Syrian regime (witness Iraq next door). But Iran 
might also hedge its bets by reaching out to rebels 
while providing material support to Asad’s regime.23 
However, some members of the Syrian political 
opposition have indicated that the Syria-Iran stra-
tegic relationship would not endure after Asad left 
power.24 A new Syrian government that reduced its 
support for Iran and for Hezbollah’s activities in the 
region could emerge if given economic and security 
incentives to engage more with the United States, 
Arab states and the international community. This 
approach could further isolate Iran, reinforcing U.S. 
efforts to limit Iran’s options and pressure it to com-
promise at the nuclear negotiating table.
Militants uninterested in participating in Syria’s 
political transition might exploit the period of 
uncertainty as power changed hands to establish 
safe havens in Syria, mount attacks against former 
regime entities or find new opportunities to stir up 
unrest in Lebanon and Iraq. If the United States 
or its allies became directly involved in efforts to 
stabilize Syria after Asad’s departure, the chances 
of militant attacks on U.S. or allied entities and 
interests would increase. 
Syria could be more antagonistic to Israel in this 
scenario, particularly if Islamist members of the 
opposition assumed power. Islamist leaders in 
Syria’s new government might advocate a more 
aggressive stance toward Israel, not only invit-
ing Hamas’ political wing back to Damascus but 
perhaps also seeking to provide more lethal support 
to Palestinian militant groups. Alternatively, Syria’s 
new government could adopt a stance toward Israel 
similar to that of the Asad regime – maintaining 
relative peace on the Golan Heights while remain-
ing technically (and rhetorically) at war with Israel. 
Even if members of the new Syrian government 
were willing to explore normalized relations or 
peace talks with Israel, they could be heavily criti-
cized by other Syrian leaders and members of the 
population who reject that path. Yet there might 
be no better way for Israel and the United States 
to jointly engage the new Syrian government than 
with revitalized Syrian-Israeli peace talks. 
SCENARIO 3: THE OPPOSITION EVENTUALLY 
DEPOSES ASAD AND CONTROLS MOST OF SYRIA
In this scenario, Syria’s civil war becomes increas-
ingly sectarian and violent. After more than a year 
If the United States or its allies became 
directly involved in efforts to stabilize 
Syria after Asad’s departure, the chances 
of militant attacks on U.S. or allied enti-
ties and interests would increase. 
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 6CNAS.ORG
of bitter struggle, a few regime officials defect and 
Asad departs, is forcibly removed or is killed. 
Key developments:
• Regime loyalists maintain relative control over 
the state, although the opposition increasingly 
contests that rule.
• As Asad’s loyal forces are increasingly deployed 
to combat rebels, safeguards on chemical weap-
ons stockpiles weaken. Asad attempts to move 
chemical weapons again for safekeeping and 
disperse them further in order to deter foreign 
intervention.
• The opposition gradually takes control of 
Damascus and Aleppo and eventually holds 
ground in the majority of the country, although 
rebel groups continue to compete for power and 
territory.
• State institutions do not survive the civil war. 
• The flow of refugees to Iraq, Lebanon, Turkey 
and Jordan increases, straining these countries’ 
capacity to absorb them.25 
The risks for U.S. interests would increase dramati-
cally with this scenario. With few defections from 
the senior ranks of the Asad regime, the opposition 
would likely rely more on foreign advice and assis-
tance to oust Asad. However, foreign support for 
the opposition could escalate the conflict, resulting 
in an even bloodier standoff between the rebels and 
the regime. Russia and Iran’s continued support 
for Asad could drag out the conflict, and some 
foreign supporters could calculate that increasing 
the lethality and sophistication of weapons pro-
vided to the rebels might give them an advantage. 
Neighboring countries might deploy troops to bor-
der regions with authorization to pursue militants 
across the border into Syria.26
Foreign support to proxies probably would not end 
once the opposition controlled territory and began 
to form its government. Syrian political players 
would also likely continue to rely on foreign spon-
sors for financial (and possibly military) support in 
the post-conflict period. Warlords with divergent 
interests could emerge on the political scene, as 
seen in the civil wars of Lebanon and Iraq.
With constrained budgets, donor fatigue and wea-
riness in the aftermath of Iraq and Afghanistan, 
some members of the international community 
may have little appetite for a robust post-conflict 
reconstruction effort. The United States and its 
allies could, however, help lead fundraising efforts 
under the auspices of the Arab League to provide 
assistance for post-conflict reconstruction, relief 
and aid for returning refugees, and help to the 
emerging Syrian political leadership in build-
ing a strategy for Syria’s future. Although Iran 
could play a constructive role in this international 
effort,27 it would likely view the relative power 
vacuum in Syria as an opportunity to reassert its 
influence with the emerging Syrian regime and 
re-establish its supply routes to Hezbollah. The 
United States would likely compete with Iran for 
influence over the new Syrian regime, as it cur-
rently does in Iraq and Lebanon.28
Even with international assistance, however, sig-
nificant internal obstacles would make it difficult 
for the Syrian opposition to consolidate power and 
govern. In its dogged pursuit of regime loyalists, 
the mostly-Sunni opposition and its sympathizers 
would increasingly marginalize and condemn the 
The United States would likely compete 
with Iran for influence over the new 
Syrian regime, as it currently does in Iraq 
and Lebanon.
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 7CNAS.ORG
Alawites, particularly if no high-profile Alawites 
chose to defect. Retribution killings would grow in 
number and brutality and could expand to include 
other minorities (Christians, Druse and others) that 
are seen as complicit with regime loyalists – even if 
they simply chose not to take sides. Fearing anni-
hilation, many Alawites could remain loyal to the 
regime to the end, possibly conducting their own 
brutal killing raids on the Sunni population.29 Some 
research suggests that ethnic divisions play less of a 
role in driving civil conflict than other factors such 
as poverty and instability.30 Nonetheless, Syria’s bit-
ter conflict – compounded by years of suppressed 
resentment and political, economic and social divi-
sions – would likely make it very difficult to form 
an inclusive post-Asad government.31
Militants uninterested in forming a new govern-
ment, including those inspired by al Qaeda, could 
take advantage of the power vacuum created by the 
protracted conflict and post-conflict consolidation 
of power to gain support among the ravaged popu-
lation. They could potentially threaten the stability 
of Syria and surrounding countries and draw the 
U.S. counterterrorism focus back to the Levant.
In the waning days of Asad’s regime, the status of 
the regime’s chemical weapons would grow more 
tenuous. The most vulnerable point would likely 
occur after the regime’s command and control 
disintegrates but before the opposition could assume 
control of the weapons. A militant group with 
insider knowledge of the safeguards on chemical 
weapons could exploit this period and gain control 
of weapons or disperse them to entities inside or out-
side of Syria. Dispersing the weapons would make it 
more difficult to contain and safeguard them if the 
United States or other partners decided to inter-
vene at some point. Israel (and possibly the United 
States) might opt to intervene to prevent Asad from 
dispersing his weapons further. Although unlikely, 
some Asad loyalists in the waning days of the regime 
might consider using chemical weapons as a last 
ditch effort against the rebels – or transferring the 
weapons to Hezbollah for “safekeeping.” The latter 
move would likely provoke a swift Israeli response to 
prevent that transfer.32 Indeed, Hezbollah might not 
be willing to risk accepting the transfer.33
SCENARIO 4: ASAD HOLDS ONTO POWER AFTER A 
PROLONGED CIVIL WAR
In this scenario, Syria is engulfed in a protracted 
civil war over the next year or more. Asad retains 
power, backed by Iran and Russia, but ultimately 
has weaker control over the state.
Key developments:
• Rebels hold marginal territory in outlying areas, 
but Asad crushes the majority of the oppositionin 
a campaign that includes mass killings, execu-
tions, torture and imprisonment of the rebels and 
civilian sympathizers.34
• Syria’s chemical weapons are at risk during the civil 
war but ultimately remain under regime control.
• Flows of refugees increase as Asad pursues the rebels.
• Iran redoubles its efforts to strengthen Asad in 
the aftermath.
This scenario reduces the risk of WMD prolifera-
tion. Wanting to avoid an international response, 
Asad would not be likely to use chemical weapons 
to retake territory in order to avoid an international 
response. His forces would be more likely to rely 
on conventional means to slaughter, torture and 
intimidate the rebels. 
Asad’s survival would diminish the credibility of 
the United States and other countries that have 
called for him to step down. This scenario would 
also likely deliver a crippling blow to Arab upris-
ings and transitioning states throughout the region. 
Asad’s resiliency could encourage entrenched auto-
cratic actors in Egypt, Libya, Tunisia and Yemen 
to resist participating in their respective political 
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 8CNAS.ORG
transitions. U.S. and international efforts to support 
political transitions in those states would become 
even more difficult to move forward. 
A stronger Iran-Syria-Hezbollah alliance could 
emerge in this scenario. Moreover, Asad’s vic-
tory could embolden Iran and make it less likely 
to cooperate on a nuclear deal. Iran could also 
ramp up its support for Hezbollah and militant 
Palestinian groups in the aftermath to demonstrate 
that its strength in the Levant had not diminished.
Asad would likely seek to stamp out al Qaeda-
inspired groups that could threaten his regime. 
However, virulent underground anti-regime 
militancy could take root among an increas-
ingly frustrated and insurgent Syrian population. 
This could create a reservoir for recruitment for 
al Qaeda-inspired groups. As Asad pursued the 
militants, they might seek refuge and establish 
new bases in neighboring countries (as seen in 
post-conflict Iraq and Libya), which could further 
destabilize the region.
Still, it would likely take time for Asad to rebuild 
his regime and reconsolidate his control over 
all of Syria. In this scenario, the regime would 
never be as strong as it was before the war. Some 
pockets of resistance could remain, backed by 
foreign sponsors. The regime might be wary of 
the threat of the rebels mounting another offen-
sive, which could make retaliatory strikes all 
the more brutal. Civilians might f lee contested 
areas, and neighboring countries would need 
U.S. and international assistance to help absorb 
and care for refugees. Indeed, from a humanitar-
ian perspective, the cost of Asad remaining in 
power after years of rebellion would be the most 
disturbing of all.
SCENARIO 5: SYRIA DISINTEGRATES ALONG 
SECTARIAN OR REGIONAL LINES
In this scenario, a grinding civil war over the 
next several years destroys state structures. Syria 
descends into anarchy with significant civilian 
casualties. Conflict grows increasingly sectarian, 
as do rebel groups. Retribution killings increase. 
Asad departs, is killed or becomes marginalized, 
and the remnants of the regime are reduced to a 
militia.35
Key developments: 
• The opposition fails to cohere politically. 
Disparate rebel groups largely act independently 
of each other. 
• Rebel militant groups not only attack regime 
elements but also fight each other as they jockey 
for power and territory. Militant groups hold ter-
ritory in scattered pockets. Regime loyalists fall 
back to areas along the Mediterranean coast, on 
the Lebanese border and in Damascus.
• Chemical weapons are at the highest risk of fall-
ing into militant hands. The United States leads 
and coordinates an international intervention to 
safeguard or destroy the chemical weapons.
• Flows of refugees and militants across borders 
skyrocket.
This is the riskiest scenario for the United States. 
As state control over Syria’s chemical weapons 
disintegrated, regime loyalists might choose to use 
chemical weapons to repel opposition advances 
against their territory. Militants could also gain 
control of some of the weapons at this point, 
although many of Syria’s chemical weapons facili-
ties are reportedly located in the western region of 
the country, where the loyalists are most likely to 
be embedded.36 Regime loyalists could also transfer 
the weapons to Lebanese Hezbollah, either as an 
interim measure or as a means to hedge against an 
Israeli attack on Syria, and Israel might consider 
invading Syria unilaterally to secure or destroy the 
weapons.37 At that point, the United States would 
have a strong interest in leading an international 
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 9CNAS.ORG
intervention to secure and destroy the chemical 
weapons,38 in order to prevent a unilateral Israeli 
intervention that would likely be longer, harder and 
more lethal. Regime loyalists would probably fight 
back against any intervening forces, however, which 
could lengthen the intervention and cause more 
Syrian casualties. 
Al Qaeda-inspired groups could more easily 
establish safe havens in this scenario as the state 
disintegrated and ungoverned space increased. 
These groups might label the international inter-
vention to secure chemical weapons as a foreign 
occupation and gain more Syrian recruits and 
sympathizers. Rebel groups and regime elements 
would likely be preoccupied with fighting each 
other and, therefore, might be less willing or able 
to act against militant groups. Furthermore, as 
borders became more porous and unmonitored, 
militant groups and arms would more freely flow 
into neighboring countries.
Prolonged conflict could lead Arab states, Turkey 
and Iran to provide additional resources to proxies 
in order to help those proxies consolidate power 
over a greater portion of the country. These proxy 
wars could escalate beyond Syria and spread to 
neighboring countries, particularly Iraq and 
Lebanon. Although reduced to a regional militia, 
regime loyalists may continue to rely on Iran’s 
military and financial support. Their concentra-
tion in the west, near the border with Lebanon 
and on the coast, could facilitate some arms 
transfers, as well as logistical and communication 
linkages to Hezbollah in Lebanon. Meanwhile, 
after losing its strategic Syrian partner, Iran might 
further strengthen its influence in Lebanon, which 
is already quite strong because of its partnership 
with Hezbollah, to ensure that its influence in the 
Levant does not wane.39 The United States could 
help contain some of the spillover effects of this 
proxy conflict by bolstering intelligence sharing 
and security cooperation with Syria’s neighbors, 
although it is arguable whether it could do more 
than it does now.
Alawites, Christians, Druse and other minori-
ties could move to regime-controlled areas, 
fearing retribution from Sunni rebel groups. 
Violence would likely increase as large popula-
tions attempted to move to safer areas where 
their sects were concentrated.40 These casualties 
would compound the significant loss of life and 
dislocation from the civil war. The United States 
could offer more robust aid to the countries that 
are absorbing considerable refugee f lows, but 
even here its ability to assist refugees and contain 
spillover effects might be limited. For example, 
significant Syrian refugee f lows could not only 
strain Jordan’s fragile economy but also further 
deepen its domestic political grievances against 
Jordan’s monarch (who happens to be a key U.S. 
partner).41
As populations concentrate along sectarian lines, 
ethnic fault lines might rupture, and Syria’s restive 
Kurds might declare independence or even seek to 
join a union with Iraqi or Turkish Kurds. Turkey 
could use military force to pursue or eradicate 
Kurdish militants across the border if it suspected 
they were using the power vacuum in Syria to 
carve out a base from which to launch attacks 
into Turkey.42 This could disrupt Turkey’s overall 
stability and its relationship with Iraq. It could also 
potentially keep Turkey from partnering with the 
United States on other U.S. priorities, including 
containing arms and militant flows from non-
Kurdish sources in Syria.
Implications for U.S. Policy
The five scenarios presented above all put U.S. 
interests at risk, and those risks will increase 
dramatically the longer the conflict lasts. While 
the United States has very little leverage with 
the Syrian regime, opposition or public, the 
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 10CNAS.ORG
United States should adopt several policies now 
to help mitigate risks to its interests as the con-
f lict evolves and the post-Asad Syria unfolds. 
The United States may not see the effects of its 
policies immediately, but it must work with inter-
national partners to implement them now to help 
set Syria on the right course and to protect U.S. 
interests over the long term.
U.S. policy should:
• Engage all emerging leaders in Syria, making it 
clear that U.S. assistance will be predicated on 
certain principles (e.g., the protection of minority 
rights in Syria and Israeli security), while being 
willing to work with individuals who share prag-
matic interests. Recent diplomatic overtures to a 
broader base of Syrian opposition members are a 
positive step in this direction.
• Acknowledge that even if the current Syria-Iran 
alliance is severed with Asad’s departure, Iran 
will likely play a role in post-Asad Syria – as it 
does in Iraq. Just as in Iraq, however, Syria’s new 
leaders will want to set themselves apart from the 
old regime and could be open to economic, secu-
rity and peace initiatives from Arab states and the 
United States that could draw Syria away from 
Iran. A Sunni-dominated Syrian state would be 
more likely to turn to Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey 
and possibly the West than to Iran. 
• Continue buttressing plans for chemical weapons 
contingencies with regional partners, particularly 
Turkey, Israel and Jordan.43 
• Caution both Israel and Turkey that interven-
ing in Syria carries significant risks, but plan to 
collectively mitigate those risks in the event that 
intervention becomes necessary.
• Increase counterterrorism intelligence sharing 
and security cooperation with Syria’s neighbors 
to track and limit the growth of terrorist cells 
in Syria. Just as U.S. regional partners have 
an interest in contingency planning for Syria’s 
chemical weapons, they also have an interest in 
preventing terrorist safe havens from emerging 
in Syria. 
• Amplify calls to partners and allies to develop 
a strategy for post-conflict assistance led by 
the Syrian opposition.44 Syria will need at least 
some, and possibly extensive, post-conflict 
reconstruction assistance, as state structures 
will be weak even in the best-case scenario. 
Resource-constrained allies will be wary of 
contributing to a post-Asad reconstruction 
effort. This international effort will have to rely 
on Gulf countries to do much of the investing – 
and with this comes the risk that their interests 
and motives may not always match U.S. intent. 
Nevertheless, the United States should pur-
sue this effort under the umbrella of the Arab 
League to mitigate the nationalist backlash that 
would likely emerge against a U.S.- or Western-
led initiative.
• Continue encouraging regime officials to defect 
by offering financial incentives and security pro-
tections for defectors’ families. Defections could 
be pivotal not only to encourage the fall of Asad’s 
regime but also to assist in rebuilding Syria in the 
aftermath. Defections could be particularly pow-
erful if they included senior Alawite officials with 
broad appeal and if Syria’s opposition integrated 
The United States may not see the effects 
of its policies immediately, but it must 
work with international partners to 
implement them now to help set Syria on 
the right course and to protect U.S. inter-
ests over the long term.
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 11CNAS.ORG
defections into its strategy. Persuading Alawites 
to defect might become increasingly difficult as 
the conflict becomes more sectarian.
• Work with regional partners to develop a strat-
egy to contain the spillover effects of the conflict 
in Syria.
• Strengthen calls to the Syrian opposition to 
include transitional justice as a plank in its politi-
cal platform, along with assurances for inclusivity 
and fair and representative governance to allay 
minority concerns. Make lethal assistance to 
opposition members conditional on their com-
pliance. Although some Syrian rebels may resist 
reaching out to Alawites seen as complicit with 
Asad’s brutal rule, transitional justice must 
be applied early and often to stop retribution 
killings.
• Continue efforts to persuade Russia to back 
Syria’s political transition. U.S. officials should 
emphasize that proxy wars in Syria or state 
disintegration would set a terrible precedent for 
Russia’s own rebellious regions.
Conclusion
The current conflict in Syria will imperil U.S. inter-
ests regardless of how it unfolds. Thus, the United 
States must prepare for a range of future scenarios 
and implement policies to hedge against risks.
Even with a hedging strategy, challenges will per-
sist. In particular, tensions among U.S. interests are 
likely to complicate policymaking. For instance, 
policies that support Syria’s opposition and reduce 
Iranian influence over a new Syrian regime may 
also result in weakened control over chemical 
weapons stockpiles, especially during a transition 
of power. Support for Syrian rebel forces could has-
ten Asad’s fall but also undermine efforts to keep 
Syrian army units intact and weaken their ability 
to provide security for civilians during a period 
of political transition. Challenges in providing 
logistical and intelligence support to internal Syrian 
rebels may skew U.S. and international assistance to 
favor opposition members working outside of Syria. 
But rebels in Syria may have greater legitimacy 
domestically and ultimately have more power over 
Syria’s trajectory.
The United States has much at stake in Syria’s 
future. Risks abound and leverage is limited, but 
thoughtful planning with allies and partners and a 
commitment to protect U.S. interests over the long 
term could result in the possibility of a new, if chal-
lenging, beginning for Syria. 
Melissa G. Dalton is a visiting fellow at the Center 
for a New American Security, on leave from the U.S. 
Department of Defense. The views in this report are 
her own and not necessarily those of the Department 
of Defense or the U.S. government.
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 12CNAS.ORG
E N D N OT E S
1. Dorian Jones and Lisa Schlein, “Numbers of Syrian Refugees Strain Neighboring 
Countries,” Voice of America, August 28, 2012, http://www.voanews.com/
content/numbers-of-syrian-refugees-strain-neighboring-countries/1497322.
html. For a thorough account of Syrian rebels’ current capabilities and the 
strength of the Syrian insurgency, see Joseph Holliday, “Syria’s Maturing 
Insurgency,” Middle East Report 5 (Institute for the Study of War, June 2012).
2 . “Syria Conflict: U.S. Secretary of State Says Rebel Gains Are Inevitable,” 
Reuters, July 24, 2012, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/07/24/syria-
conflict-hillary-clinton_n_1698952.html; and David Ignatius, “Looking 
for a Syrian End Game,” The Washington Post, July 18, 2012, http://www.
washingtonpost.com/opinions/david-ignatius-syria-approaches-the-tipping-
point/2012/07/18/gJQAFoCvtW_story.html.
3. Interview with Assistant Secretary of State for International Security and 
Nonproliferation Thomas Countryman, “Preventing WMD Proliferation,” U.S. 
Department of State, July 31, 2012, http://www.state.gov/r/pa/pl/cwa/195988.
htm; “Syria and Its Chemical Weapons: Watch Out!” The Economist, July 28, 
2012, http://www.economist.com/node/21559671; and “Syria’s Chemical 
Weapons: Obama Says World Is Watching,” BBC News, July 23, 2012, http://
www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-18963720; and Joby Warrick, 
“Worries Intensify Over Syrian Chemical Weapons,” The Washington Post, 
September 7, 2012, http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/
worries-intensify-over-syrian-chemical-weapons/2012/09/06/13889aac-f841-
11e1-8253-3f495ae70650_story.html.
4. Daniel Byman and Kenneth Pollack, “The Syrian Spillover,” Foreign Policy, 
August 10, 2012, http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2012/08/10/
the_syrian_spillover. Lebanon’s restive north has already seen increasing 
Sunni-Alawite conflict, as Syria’s unrest exacerbates simmering tensions from 
Lebanon’s own civil war. Turkey worries that the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) 
could partner with Syria’s Kurds to mount attacks against Turkey. Recent al 
Qaeda in Iraq attacks have been linked to the Syrian uprising, and absorbing 
Syria’s refugee flow strains Jordan’s resources and could challenge its stability. 
Lina Khatib,“The Crisis in Syria is Reopening Lebanon’s Old War Divisions,” The 
Guardian, June 9, 2012, http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/jun/09/
crisis-syria-lebanon-clashes; Dorian Jones, “Tensions Rise as Turkey Continues 
Offensive,” Voice of America News, August 3, 2012, http://www.voanews.com/
content/tensions-rise-as-turkey-continues-offensive-against-pkk/1455079.html; 
Yasir Ghazi and Rod Nordlund, “Iraq Insurgents Kill at Least 100 After Delcaring 
New Offensive,” The New York Times, July 23, 2012, http://www.nytimes.
com/2012/07/24/world/middleeast/iraqi-insurgents-kill-dozens-in-wave-of-
attacks.html; and Lyce Doucet, “Jordan Struggles with Syria’s Refugee Influx,” BBC 
News, August 3, 2012, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-19107575.
5. Jubin Goodarzi, “Iran and Syria,” in The Iran Primer, United States Institute of 
Peace, 2011, http://iranprimer.usip.org/resource/iran-and-syria.
6. Rod Norlund, “Al Qaeda Taking Deadly New Role in Syria’s Conflict,” The New York 
Times, July 24, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/25/world/middleeast/
al-qaeda-insinuating-its-way-into-syrias-conflict.html?_r=2&hp; and Seth G. 
Jones, “Al Qaeda’s War for Syria,” The Wall Street Journal, July 26, 2012, http://online.
wsj.com/article/SB10000872396390443343704577551281530782466.html.
7. Jodi Rudoren, “Israel Forced to Rethink Its Regional Strategies,” The New York 
Times, July 19, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/20/world/middleeast/
israel-worries-as-syria-deteriorates.html.
8 . “Additional Humanitarian Assistance in Response to Violence in 
Syria,” U.S. Department of State Media Note, September 5, 2012, http://
iipdigital.usembassy.gov/st/english/texttrans/2012/09/20120905135477.
html#axzz25hIfSCg8; and “U.S. Blames China and Russia for Syrian Peace 
Failures,” ABC News, August 2, 2012, http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/
politics/2012/08/white-house-blames-china-russia-for-syrian-peace-failure/.
9 . Ignatius, “Looking for a Syrian End Game.”
10 . While the U.S. military will continue to contribute to security globally, the 
United States has stated that it will, of necessity, rebalance toward the Asia-
Pacific region. “Sustaining U.S. Global Leadership: Priorities for 21st Century 
Defense,” U.S. Department of Defense, January 2012, www.defense.gov/news/
Defense_Strategic_Guidance.pdf.
11. Anne-Marie Slaughter, “We Will Pay a High Price If We Don’t Arm Syria’s 
Rebels,” Financial Times, July 31, 2012, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/
a03392ce-da35-11e1-b03b-00144feab49a.html#axzz22fWztEvP.
12 . For a detailed analysis of the political, economic and social foundations 
of the Asad regime, see Hanna Batatu, Syria’s Peasantry, the Descendents of 
its Lesser Rural Notables, and Their Politics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1999). For a more concise overview of these dynamics, see Bassam 
Haddad, “The Syrian Regime’s Business Backbone,” Middle East Report, Spring 
2012, http://www.merip.org/mer/mer262/syrian-regimes-business-backbone.
13. “Syria’s Mutating Conflict,” Middle East Report No. 128 (International Crisis 
Group, August 2012).
14. Ibid.
15. Roy Licklider, “The Consequences of Negotiated Settlements After Civil 
Wars,” American Political Science Review, 89 no. 3 (1995), 681-690. 
16. This dynamic would be similar to the ways in which Al Qaeda in Iraq 
successfully exploited Iraq’s political morass. Abdel Bari Atwan, “Al Qaeda’s 
Hand in Tipping Iraq Toward Civil War,” The Christian Science Monitor, March 
20, 2006, http://www.csmonitor.com/2006/0320/p09s01-coop.html; and 
Joost Hiltermann, “Violence in Iraq? It’s the Politics Stupid!” CNN Global Public 
Square, July 30, 2012, http://globalpublicsquare.blogs.cnn.com/2012/07/30/
violence-in-iraq-its-the-politics-stupid.
17. Iran and Hezbollah’s alleged plots in India, Kenya and Bulgaria may have 
been a scramble to lash out after covert attacks on its nuclear program. 
See Nicholas Kulish and Jodi Rudoren, “Plots Are Tied to Shadow War of 
Israel and Iran,” The New York Times, August 8, 2012, http://www.nytimes.
com/2012/08/09/world/middleeast/murky-plots-and-attacks-tied-to-shadow-
war-of-iran-and-israel.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&hp; and Kevjn Lim, “Iran’s 
Secret Weapon,” The National Interest, August 9, 2012, http://nationalinterest.
org/commentary/irans-secret-weapon-7313.
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/07/24/syria-conflict-hillary-clinton_n_1698952.html
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/07/24/syria-conflict-hillary-clinton_n_1698952.html
http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/david-ignatius-syria-approaches-the-tipping-point/2012/07/18/gJQAFoCvtW_story.html
http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/david-ignatius-syria-approaches-the-tipping-point/2012/07/18/gJQAFoCvtW_story.html
http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/david-ignatius-syria-approaches-the-tipping-point/2012/07/18/gJQAFoCvtW_story.html
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/pl/cwa/195988.htm
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/pl/cwa/195988.htm
http://www.economist.com/node/21559671
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-18963720
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-18963720
http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/jun/09/crisis-syria-lebanon-clashes
http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/jun/09/crisis-syria-lebanon-clashes
http://www.voanews.com/content/tensions-rise-as-turkey-continues-offensive-against-pkk/1455079.html
http://www.voanews.com/content/tensions-rise-as-turkey-continues-offensive-against-pkk/1455079.html
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/24/world/middleeast/iraqi-insurgents-kill-dozens-in-wave-of-attacks.html
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/24/world/middleeast/iraqi-insurgents-kill-dozens-in-wave-of-attacks.html
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/24/world/middleeast/iraqi-insurgents-kill-dozens-in-wave-of-attacks.html
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/25/world/middleeast/al-qaeda-insinuating-its-way-into-syrias-conflict.html?_r=2&hp
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/25/world/middleeast/al-qaeda-insinuating-its-way-into-syrias-conflict.html?_r=2&hp
http://www.csmonitor.com/2006/0320/p09s01-coop.html
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/09/world/middleeast/murky-plots-and-attacks-tied-to-shadow-war-of-iran-and-israel.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&hp
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/09/world/middleeast/murky-plots-and-attacks-tied-to-shadow-war-of-iran-and-israel.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&hp
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/09/world/middleeast/murky-plots-and-attacks-tied-to-shadow-war-of-iran-and-israel.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&hp
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 13CNAS.ORG
18. For example, Turkey could establish a safe zone along its border with Syria, 
perhaps with U.S. air cover or support. The safe zone could ostensibly be for 
humanitarian and refugee relief, but it could also create a beachhead to allow 
opposition elements to organize and funnel arms to strongholds in northern 
Syria. It could also put pressure on the Syrian military and security forces – 
redeploying along the border of the safe zone might require them to reduce 
their presence in other rebel locations. The net result could bring Asad down. 
19. A military coup in Syria could follow the same broad pattern as the 
transition in Egypt: The military could oust Asad and then lead a transition 
effort, leaving much of the state’s structure intact. Assuming that Syria’s 
military would eventually relinquish or share power with the Syrian opposition 
(which may be a big assumption), this approach would provide more time for 
Syria’s opposition to coalesce, but the same risks of other managed-transition 
scenarios would apply. For a discussion of what a military coup could look 
like in Syria, see Mona Yacobian, “The Road to Syria’s Salvation Runs Through 
Moscow,” Foreign Policy, March 1, 2012, http://mideast.foreignpolicy.com/
posts/2012/03/01/the_road_to_syrias_salvation_runs_through_moscow.
20. Ignatius, “Looking for a Syrian End Game.” Nonetheless, even a transition 
of power in the short term could challenge U.S. interests. Asad and his senior 
officials are unlikely to step aside until the opposition becomes stronger and 
more cohesive, both politically and militarily. Although the Syrian opposition 
has demonstrated some resiliency and increasing military capabilities in recent 
months, it will need more robust foreign assistance from the United States and 
U.S. partners to improve its ability to consolidate power and govern. The United 
States has thus far reportedly provided only nonlethal assistance, command-
and-control support, and coordination of arms flow from foreign partners to 
the rebels. It has also sought to encourage cohesion among Syria’s internal 
and expatriate political opposition elements. However, the United States has 
reportedly resisted providing lethal assistance to the rebels, given how little 
it knows about members of the opposition and their intent. The nonlethal 
support approach limits the risk of the United States aiding and abetting 
potential terrorists, but it is based on the assumption that an incremental 
approach will give the rebels enough of an advantage to consolidate their gains 
and that Syria’s opposition elements have the resiliency to sustain significant 
casualties and oppression in the meantime.
21. One recent study finds that the strength of state institutions, committed 
foreign advice and assistance, the quality of rebel militia forces, and effective 
management of the security-sector reform process are key factors in determining 
whether a state succeeds in integrating rebel forces and regime security services 
after a civil conflict. Failure has occurred because one or more of these four factors 
has been absent. See Stephen F. Burgess, “Fashioning Integrated Security Services 
After Conflict,” African Security, 1 no. 2 (2008), 69-91.
22. Some analytic accounts point to Syria’s military increasingly being 
perceived as an occupation force. See “Syria’s Mutating Conflict.” 
23. “Iran Offers to Host Syria Talks,” CNN Online, July 15, 2012, http://articles.
cnn.com/2012-07-15/middleeast/world_meast_iran-syria_1_syrian-
opposition-press-tv-syrian-government; and “Top Iran Military Official Aiding 
Asad’s Crackdown on Syria Opposition,” Haaretz, February 6, 2012, http://
www.haaretz.com/news/middle-east/report-top-iran-military-official-aiding-
assad-s-crackdown-on-syria-opposition-1.411402.
24. Emile Hokayem, “Syria and Its Neighbours,” Survival, 54 no. 2 (April-May 2012), 8.
25. Refugees from Iraq’s civil war, for example, drove up fuel, water and 
electricity prices; strained health and education services; and corresponded 
with a rise in criminality in neighboring Syria and Jordan. See Andrew Harper, 
“Iraq’s Refugees: Ignored and Unwanted,” International Review of the Red Cross, 
90 no. 869 (2008), 169-190.
26. Indeed, with the Turks on edge about increasing Syrian Kurdish activism 
and connectivity with Turkey’s own Kurdish rebels, they may decide that 
cross-border pursuit is a favorable option. “Turkey Military Drill on Syria Border 
Eyes Kurds,” ABC News, August 1, 2012, http://abcnews.go.com/International/
wireStory/turkish-minister-meet-iraqi-kurds-syria-16902204#.UBlEIkR3_LI.
27. Iran arguably played a constructive role in the 2001 Bonn conference on 
Afghanistan. See James Dobbins, “Engaging Iran,” in The Iran Primer, United 
States Institute of Peace, 2011, http://iranprimer.usip.org/resource/engaging-
iran. Also, Iran has offered to host meetings between Syrian rebels and the 
regime; see “Iran Offers to Host Syria Talks.” 
28. See Anthony Cordesman, “U.S. and Iranian Strategic Competition” (Center for 
Strategic and International Studies, 2011), http://csis.org/program/us-and-iranian-
strategic-competition. Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey also have significant interests 
in Syria’s outcome, which may differ from those of the United States.
29 . The Asad regime has already reportedly used armed militias called shabiha, 
comprised mostly of Alawites, to conduct killing raids against Sunni villages. 
Harriet Alexander and Ruth Sherlock, “The Shabiha: Inside Asad’s Death Squads,” 
The Telegraph, June 2, 2012, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/
middleeast/syria/9307411/The-Shabiha-Inside-Assads-death-squads.html.
30. James D. Fearon and David D. Laitin, “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,” 
American Political Science Review, 97 no. 1 (2003), 88.
31. Political, economic and social divisions may underlie many of the Syrian 
rebels’ grievances, but they may not ultimately play a role in determining the 
outcome of the war in Syria. See T. David Mason and Patrick J. Fett, “How Civil 
Wars End: A Rational Choice Approach,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 40 no. 4 
(1996), 546-568.
32. “Israel Fears Syria’s Chemical Weapons Could Be Seized by Hezbollah 
or al-Qaida,” Haaretz, July 22, 2012, http://www.haaretz.com/news/
diplomacy-defense/israel-fears-syria-s-chemical-weapons-could-be-seized-
by-hezbollah-or-al-qaida-1.452722.
33. Iran and Hezbollah have shown restraint in the degree to which they 
threaten Israeli or regional stability so as not to incur U.S. or Israeli retaliation. 
See Colin H. Kahl, Matthew Irvine and Melissa G. Dalton,“Risk and Rivalry: Iran, 
Israel and the Bomb” (Center for a New American Security, June 2012), http://
www.cnas.org/riskandrivalry.
34. For the Asad regime, there is no middle ground between absolute triumph 
and fatal defeat. See “Syria’s Mutating Conflict.” 
35. For the antecedents of the regime’s transformation into a militia, see Ibid.
http://articles.cnn.com/2012-07-15/middleeast/world_meast_iran-syria_1_syrian-opposition-press-tv-syrian-government
http://articles.cnn.com/2012-07-15/middleeast/world_meast_iran-syria_1_syrian-opposition-press-tv-syrian-government
http://articles.cnn.com/2012-07-15/middleeast/world_meast_iran-syria_1_syrian-opposition-press-tv-syrian-government
http://csis.org/program/us-and-iranian-strategic-competition
http://csis.org/program/us-and-iranian-strategic-competition
P O L I C Y B R I E FS E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 2 14CNAS.ORG
About the Center for a New American Security 
The mission of the Center for a New American Security (CNAS) is to develop strong, pragmatic and principled national 
security and defense policies. Building on the expertise and experience of its staff and advisors, CNAS engages policy-
makers, experts and the public with innovative, fact-based research, ideas and analysis to shape and elevate the national 
security debate. A key part of our mission is to inform and prepare the national security leaders of today and tomorrow.
 CNAS is located in Washington, and was established in February 2007 by co-founders Kurt M. Campbell and Michèle A. 
Flournoy. CNAS is a 501(c)3 tax-exempt nonprofit organization. Its research is independent and non-partisan. CNAS does not take institutional positions on 
policy issues. The views expressed in this report are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of Defense or 
the U.S. government.
© 2012 Center for a New American Security. 
All rights reserved.
Center for a New American Security
1301 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Suite 403
Washington, DC 20004
TEL 202.457.9400
FAX 202.457.9401
EMAIL info@cnas.org
www.cnas.org
Contacts
Kay King
Senior Advisor 
and Director of External Relations
kking@cnas.org, 202.457.9408
Sara Conneighton
Deputy Director of External Relations
sconneighton@cnas.org, 202.457.9429
Free Syrian Army fighters celebrate after 
hearing that their comrades destroyed a 
Syrian Army tank in Idlib, north Syria. 
(RODRIGO ABD/Associated Press)
36. According to recent reports, Asad has dispersed Syria’s chemical weapons 
to as many as 20 sites throughout the country. See “Suspected Production of 
Chemical Weapons,” Spiegel Online, http://www.spiegel.de/international/
world/bild-847203-382218.html; and Warrick, “Worries Intensify Over Syrian 
Chemical Weapons.”
37. Ronen Bergman, Juliane von Mittelstaedt, Matthias Schepp and Holger 
Stark, “Fate of Syrian Chemical Weapons May Trigger War,” Spiegel Online, July 
31, 2012, http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/israel-prepares-plans-
to-neutralize-syrian-chemical-weapons-a-847203.html.
38. Mark Hosenbell and Phil Stewart,“Securing Syria’s Chemical 
Weapons May Take Tens of Thousands of Troops,” Reuters, 
August 16, 2012, http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/08/16/
us-syria-crisis-chemicalweapons-idUSBRE87F16520120816.
39. Firas Maksad, “Washington, get ready for more Iranian influence after 
Bashar al-Asad falls in Syria,” The Christian Science Monitor, August 2, 2012, 
http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2012/0802/Washington-
get-ready-for-more-Iranian-influence-after-Bashar-al-Assad-falls-in-Syria.
40. Increased violence and large population displacements commonly occur 
during civil wars, especially when territory is formally or informally partitioned 
(as in India/Pakistan, Bosnia and Iraq). As one observer noted, “The grisly 
massacres running riot through the Syrian countryside are not mere sectarian 
outbursts or bouts of senseless killings and retaliatory counterkillings; they 
bear the telltale markings of what became known in Yugoslavia of the 1990s 
as ‘ethnic cleansing.’” See Franck Salameh, “An Alawite State in Syria?” The 
National Interest, July 10, 2012, http://nationalinterest.org/commentary/
alawite-state-syria-7173.
41. Karim Faheem, “Jordan Worries Turmoil Will Follow as Syria’s Refugees 
Flood In,” The New York Times, July 25, 2012, http://www.nytimes.
com/2012/07/26/world/middleeast/jordan-is-anxious-as-syrian-refugees-
flood-in.html.
42. Aaron David Miller, “Why Syria’s Rebels Can’t Have it All,” Foreign 
Policy, August 1, 2012, http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2012/08/01/
why_syrias_rebels_cant_have_it_all?page=0,1.
43. The United States and these partners have reportedly developed 
contingency plans that include sending experts to work with Syrian rebels 
to secure the chemical weapons. Other contingency plans reportedly include 
deploying military forces if the chemical weapons sites are overrun during 
the course of the conflict, or if the regime or its supporters prepare to use the 
weapons. James Blitz, “Fears Grow over Syria’s Chemical Arms,” Financial Times, 
July 15, 2012, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/02f97808-ce63-11e1-bc0c-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz22xzSqKZ3; and Warrick, “Worries Intensify Over 
Syrian Chemical Weapons.”
44. The Day After Project, which was facilitated by the United States Institute 
of Peace and the German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP), 
provides a solid foundation for Syria’s transition planning process. See http://
www.usip.org/the-day-after-project.
