
By Christopher Yung and Patrick McNulty
China’s Tailored Coercion and Its Rivals’ 
Actions and Responses: 
What the Numbers Tell Us
J A N U A R Y 2 0 1 5
M A R I T I M E 
S T R AT EG Y SER I E S
Cover Image
A map of the South China Sea depicting some of the overlapping territorial 
and maritime claims. 
Source: U.S. State Department
About this Series
Maritime tensions in the East and South China Seas have raised significant questions about the long-term peace and stabil-
ity that has enabled Asia’s economic rise over the last several decades. While these disputes are longstanding, recent years 
have seen attempts to unilaterally change the status quo through tailored coercion that falls short of war. These activities 
do not appear to be abating despite growing international concern. While policy efforts to alleviate tensions must include 
engagement and binding, a comprehensive approach must include countering coercive moves by imposing costs on bad 
behavior. This series aims to explore various types and facets of strategies to deter, deny and impose costs on provocative 
behavior in maritime Asia. Hopefully these papers will, jointly and severally, generate new thinking on how to both main-
tain security and build order across the Indo-Pacific region. 
China’s Tailored Coercion and Its Rivals’ Actions and Responses: 
What the Numbers Tell Us
By Christopher Yung and Patrick McNulty
J A N U A R Y 2 0 1 5
About the Authors
Dr. Christopher Yung is a Senior Research Fellow at 
the Institute for National Strategic Studies, National 
Defense University
Patrick McNulty, at the time of writing, was a 
Research analyst at the Institute of National Strategic 
Studies, National Defense University
| 3
I N T R O D U C T I O N
By Christopher Yung and Patrick McNulty
The Center for New American Security (CNAS) is 
embarked on a year-long study exploring practical 
strategies to deter and impose costs on bad behav-
ior in the East and South China Seas. 2 This paper 
examines the tactics and actions employed by China 
and its rival claimants in the South China Sea, based 
on a National Defense University (NDU) data-
base constructed by the authors between 2012 and 
2013. The authors conducted extensive open source 
searches of the actions employed by South China 
Sea claimants to defend or advance their territorial 
claims, cataloging more than 1,200 actions between 
1995 and 2012.3 These actions are grouped into 
nine categories (military; paramilitary; economic; 
administrative; legal; coalition diplomacy; negotia-
tion; dispute management4; and informational) 
encompassing 39 different individual tactics.5 The 
findings are based on analysis of the NDU database.6
This approach allows for empirical analysis of 
claimant behavior, but has some practical limita-
tions. First, actions included in the database were 
identified based on translated Open Source Center 
reports selected by other U.S. government ana-
lysts; time and manpower limitations did not allow 
comprehensive foreign language searches in the 
media of all claimant countries. Second, categoriz-
ing actions requires a degree of subjective judgment. 
For instance, China’s insistence at an international 
meeting that maritime disputes be resolved bilat-
erally could be interpreted as a sincere effort to 
negotiate, or as an effort to divide rival claimants 
and prevent formation of an anti-China coalition. 
Third, the study focuses on identifying distinct 
actions rather than capturing ongoing efforts to 
exert control over disputed waters or land features. 
For example, a two week patrol by a law enforcement 
vessel or a naval exercise involving multiple ships 
are both counted as single actions in the database. 
This approach made counting more manageable, but 
does not give a full sense of the scope and context of 
military and paramilitary actions.7
China’s Tailored Coercion and Its Rivals’ Actions and Responses: 
What the Numbers Tell Usj A N U A R Y 2 0 1 5
4 |
G E N E R A L S U M M A R Y O F F I N D I N G S
After populating the data base, the research team 
analyzed the results to identify patterns of behavior. 
General findings, which are represented above, are 
that China is the most active user of almost all of 
the tactics listed and is also most prone to use mili-
tary and paramilitary actions to defend its claims. 
China is the most active user of every instrument of 
coercion or influence except for legal action, where 
the Philippines is most active. 
One objective of CNAS’s maritime strategy proj-
ect is to address the challenge of China’s tailored 
coercion relevant to the South China Sea dis-
pute. The remainder of this report focuses on 
analyzing China’s coercive actions and Southeast 
Asian responses, and also looking at independent 
Southeast Asian actions which China argues justify 
its responses.
M O R E PA R A M I L I TA R Y, L E S S M I L I TA R Y
Table two illustrates the tactics used in the April 
2012 Scarborough Shoal case. It lists military (M), 
paramilitary (PM), and informational (I) actions 
by the various claimants during the crisis. Number 
designations reflect the specific tactics employed 
by the claimants ranging from the use of force 
(M1, PM1), movement into a disputed area (M2, 
PM2), reinforcement of a maritime area already 
occupied by the claimant (M3, PM3), reactions to 
the movements of rival claimants (M4, PM4), and 
withdrawal of forces (M5,PM5). The “I” designa-
tion presents strategic communications efforts 
ranging from official press releases and announce-
ments (I1), newspaper reports, (I2) and social 
media accounts (I3). In this case, the assess-
ment displays the instances of the Philippines’ 
use of military assets, the Philippines’ use of law 
enforcement assets such as its coast guard, and the 
instances of China’s use of its paramilitary China 
Maritime Surveillance (CMS) force. As table two 
illustrates, China overwhelmingly relied on its 
0
100
200
300
400
500
Information
Administrative
Dispute Management
Negotiations
Coalition Diplomacy
Legal
Economic
Paramilitary
Military
TaiwanBruneiMalaysiaVietnamPhilippinesChina
TABLE 1: TOTAL ACTIONS BY STATE
| 5
CMS vessels to advance its claim. The Philippines 
utilized both military and law enforcement assets 
when and where it could. Nonetheless, China 
overwhelmed the Philippines with its paramilitary 
presence. At this point it also needs to be noted that 
the Chinese claim that the Philippines initiated the 
Scarborough Shoal confrontation when the latter 
arrested Chinese fishermen in disputed waters.
Table three (see page 6) illustrates the Mischief 
Reef case, which occurred in 1995. In contrast 
to Scarborough Shoal, the PLA Navy was heav-
ily involved at Mischief Reef. The earlier case also 
involved a more balanced confrontation between 
China and the Philippines, whereas at Scarborough 
Shoal the Philippines were overwhelmed by 
China’s numbers. The prevalence of China 
Maritime Surveillance (CMS) ships at Scarborough 
Shoal strongly suggests that this was a deliber-
ate Chinese strategy. In 2012 interviews, Chinese 
naval officers, government officials, and scholars 
affirmed that law enforcement vessels were delib-
erately placed as the “tip of the spear” in maritime 
territorial defense and law enforcement missions to 
limit escalation.8 
N O O V E R T E F F O R T AT C H I N E S E 
D E - E S C A L AT I O N
Comparing Scarborough Shoal with Mischief Reef 
0
5
10
15
20
I3I2I1PM5PM4PM3PM2PM1M5M4M3M2M1
Taiwan
Brunei
Malaysia
Vietnam
Philippines
China
TABLE 2: SCARBOROUGH SHOAL
M1 = Use of force
M2 = Movement into a disputed area
M3 = Reinforcement of a maritime area 
already occupied by the claimant
M4 = Reactions to the movements of rival 
claimants
M5 = Withdrawal of forces
PM1 = Use of force 
PM2 = Movement into a disputed area 
PM3 = Reinforcement of a maritime area 
already occupied by the claimant 
PM4 = Reactions to the movements of 
rival claimants 
PM5 = Withdrawal of forces
I1 = Official press releases and announce-
ments 
I2 = Newspaper reports 
I3 = Social media accounts
LEGEND
China’s Tailored Coercion and Its Rivals’ Actions and Responses: 
What the Numbers Tell Usj A N U A R Y 2 0 1 5
6 |
clearly reveals that, in the earlier confrontation, 
Chinese officials at some point recognized that 
they needed to calm the situation down and signal 
their desire to de-escalate the crisis. What followed 
was diplomatic and conciliatory language trans-
mitted through the international media promising 
to resolve the matter on the basis of international 
law.9 No such dynamic was evident with the 
Scarborough Shoal case.10 Instead, the United 
States interceded and the two sides promised to 
withdraw from the area. Both did so, but then the 
Chinese CMS ships returned and have maintained 
a presence ever since.11 The difference in the two 
cases is that, at Scarborough Shoal, China was 
unwilling to signal a willingness to de-escalate 
and to resolve the matter peacefully, likely because 
China’s military and paramilitary capabilities are 
much stronger than in the mid-1990s.
E CO N O M I C C A R R OT S A N D S T I C K S
China made by far the most use of economic 
instruments to attempt to influence its rivals in the 
South China Sea. As table four illustrates on page 
7, China utilized the full range of economic tac-
tics. Between 1995 and 2012, China took economic 
actions 75 times; its nearest rival, the Philippines, 
did so 36 times. China was not the only claimant 
state to threaten economic sanctions (E1 in the 
table) against rivals or to sign access agreements 
(E2) with third parties (either countries or corpora-
tions), but its use of such instruments (48) dwarfed 
its rivals (Philippines: 14; Vietnam 8). China’s 
use of economic instruments was not all coercive. 
Beijing’s attempts to arrive at joint development 
deals (E3) was also extensive and outnumbered 
those of its rivals, as Table 4 illustrates. China was 
also the most extensive user of economic induce-
ments (E4), lavishing rivals with generous trade 
and investment deals. No other rival claimant 
matched China’s efforts; only the Philippines and 
Taiwan used this tactic at all.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
I3I2I1PM5PM4PM3PM2PM1M5M4M3M2M1
Taiwan
Brunei
Malaysia
Vietnam
Philippines
China
TABLE 3: MISCHIEF REEF DATA
* Refer to the legend on page 6
| 7
CO E R C I O N A N D I N F LU E N C E 
T H R O U G H D I P LO M AC Y
An examination of China’s behavior during the 
2012 Code of Conduct (CoC)/Declaration of 
Consensus of the Parties (DoC) negotiations in 
Cambodia illustrates China’s efforts at influence 
peddling in diplomatic venues. The database 
divides diplomatic actions into three broad catego-
ries: Coalition Diplomacy (CD); Negotiations (N); 
and Dispute Management (DM). Coalition diplo-
macy means actions taken by the claimant state to 
either form coalitions or break up rival coalitions. 
Negotiations are actions by the claimant state to 
either engage in negotiations to resolve a dispute, 
or to refuse or delay negotiations. Finally, some 
claimants may have concluded that the best course 
of action is to lower tensions and therefore make 
efforts to agree to confidence building measures or 
other temporary measures designed to avert direct 
clashes between the parties (dispute management). 
When we examined the DoC/CoC negotiations, 
some interesting diplomatic patterns emerged.
First, as reported in the media12, and confirmed 
by our data (see table five on page 8), China spent 
a considerable amount of effort preventing the 
formation of coalitions against its South China Sea 
position (CD1) and attempting to form coalitions 
of its own (CD2). The most apparent manifestation 
was the inability of the ten ASEAN states to arrive 
at a consensus on including a reference to the 
South China Sea dispute as a serious security issue 
at the 2012 ASEAN summit, leading to the first 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
TaiwanBruneiMalaysiaVietnamPhilippinesChina
E4
E3
E2
E1
TABLE 4: ECONOMIC ACTIONS BY STATE
LEGEND
E1 = Threatening economic sanctions against rivals 
E2 = Signing access agreements with third parties (countries or corporations) 
E3 = Arriving at joint development deals 
E4 = Economic inducements (trade and investment deals)
China’s Tailored Coercion and Its Rivals’ Actions and Responses: 
What the Numbers Tell Usj A N U A R Y 2 0 1 5
8 |
0
5
10
15
20
DM4DM3DM2DM1N5N4N3N2N1CD4CD3CD2CD1
Taiwan
Brunei
Malaysia
Vietnam
Philippines
China
Indonesia
ASEAN
TABLE 5: DOC/COC NEGOTIATIONS (2012)
LEGEND
CD1 = Preventing formation of coalitions 
against one’s own position 
CD2 = Forming coalitions in support of 
one’s position
CD3 = Welcoming regional multilateral 
organizations to resolve dispute
CD4 = Inviting outside powers to resolve 
dispute
N1 = Refusing to engage in negotiations 
N2 = Insisting on bilateral negotiations 
only 
N3 = Engaging in multi-party negotiations 
N4 = Participating in multilateral bodies to 
resolve disputes 
N5 = Inviting outside parties to arbitrate
DM1 = Agreeing to declaration of prin-
ciples to resolve dispute peacefully 
DM2 = Commiting to work toward a Code 
of Conduct, which is also okay 
DM3 = Instituting binding confidence 
building measures 
DM4 = Inviting outside dispute manage-
ment mechanisms
| 9
failure to issue a joint communiqué in the body’s 
history. China reportedly scuttled the joint com-
muniqué through promises of lucrative economic 
deals to then-ASEAN chair Cambodia.13 Second, 
China insisted on bilateral negotiations with each 
of the claimants and objected to a joint ASEAN 
position on a code of conduct agreed beforehand 
(N2). It thus rejected multilateral negotiations and 
insisted on a bilateral structure.14 Finally, China 
has long been on record as supporting efforts to 
resolve disputes peacefully (DM1), including a 
code of conduct in principle, and indeed signed the 
2002 agreement on the Declaration of Consensus 
of the Parties (DoC) which included a commitment 
to work toward a Code of Conduct (DM2). Thus, 
China has agreed in principle on resolving the ter-
ritorial disputes through negotiation and peaceful 
means; but has not agreed to binding measures 
which carry penalties for noncompliance.15 China’s 
influence-oriented diplomatic behavior is thus 
composed of the following: diplomatic maneu-
vering to break up coalitions of ASEAN states 
attempting to act as a united front on South China 
Sea issues; sweetening the pot for other ASEAN 
states to side with China in ASEAN discussions on 
the South China Sea; insistence on bilateral negoti-
ations to the exclusion of multilateral mechanisms 
to resolve the dispute; and agreeing in principle to 
resolve the dispute peacefully, but obstructing any 
effort to meaningfully impose a binding code of 
conduct or other confidence building measures on 
the dispute resolution process.
I N F O R M AT I O N AC T I O N S
China easily outpaces its rivals in terms of infor-
mation actions. We recorded some 156 discrete 
Chinese information actions versus 133 actions for 
the Philippines and 93 for Taiwan, its closest rivals 
Taiwan
10
28
66
133
156
93
Malaysia BruneiVietnamPhilippinesChina
TABLE 6: INFORMATION ACTIONS BY STATE
China’s Tailored Coercion and Its Rivals’ Actions and Responses: 
What the Numbers Tell Usj A N U A R Y 2 0 1 5
10 |
in this sphere. Additionally, China is the most 
robust user of social media to broadcast its message 
both domestically and internationally. To some 
degree this may be the result of the fact that China 
has a very well developed and centralized propa-
ganda and censorship apparatus.
L E G A L AC T I O N S
The only category where the number of China’s 
actions lags behind that of rival claimants is in the 
legal sphere. As Table 1 illustrates, the Philippines’ 
actions (21) between 1995 and 2012 exceeded 
those of China (12). Much of this is due to the fact 
that the Philippines have been relentlessly pursu-
ing a court case before an arbitral tribunal of the 
International Tribunal on Law of the Sea (ITLOS). 
China has stated that neither ITLOS nor the 
International Court of Justice (ICJ) has jurisdiction 
over this matter and has refused to participate in 
the proceedings. China has made its legal posi-
tion known through its positions in UNCLOS 
and other bilateral maritime legal agreements, 
through Chinese legal experts publishing their 
opinions in law journals (an informational action), 
and through the issuance of position papers by the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, but has not presented 
its legal positions to an international court.16 
TAC T I C S O F S O U T H E A S T A S I A N 
C L A I M A N T S : T H E N U M B E R S
Southeast Asian countries and many outside 
observers see a clear pattern of Chinese coercion 
and influence peddling, especially since 2009. 
However, Chinese officials, military officers, and 
scholars generally claim that China is respond-
ing to provocative actions by rival claimants in 
Southeast Asia. This section of the paper seeks to 
provide clarity on this issue by taking a closer look 
at rival claimant actions in the South China Sea.
S O U T H E A S T A S I A N C L A I M A N T S’ U S E 
O F M I L I TA R Y A N D PA R A M I L I TA R Y 
AC T I O N S 
As stated above, China has made the most use of 
military and paramilitary actions to defend its 
maritime territorial claims. What is surprising, 
however, is how few military and paramilitary 
actions appear to be used by some other claim-
ants. Vietnam’s apparently infrequent use of 
military and paramilitary actions (13) is espe-
cially striking, given that the database dates back 
to 1995, which implies that Vietnam used such 
tactics on average less than once a year. When 
asked, some Vietnamese interlocutors stated 
that Vietnam is a peace-loving nation, so the 
numbers speak for themselves. In other conver-
sations, Vietnamese specialists pointed out that 
these numbers only reflect those actions officially 
announced or revealed by the press, and thus 
undercount Vietnamese military and paramilitary 
actions. Chinese interviewees also indicate that the 
database undercounts Chinese military and para-
military actions. The low number of military and 
paramilitary actions by Malaysia and Brunei is also 
notable. The data include some instances when the 
coast guards of each country arrested fishermen of 
rival claimant states. Nonetheless, public military 
and paramilitary action is extremely rare for both 
Malaysia and Brunei. 
The Philippines is the only Southeast Asian coun-
try whose military and paramilitary actions comes 
remotely close to rivalling those of China. These 
actions include the movement of military person-
nel, the erection of defenses, patrolling, and other 
actions designed to bolster the Philippines’ territo-
rial claims. Philippine actions are still dwarfed 
by China’s, but given its relatively weak Navy and 
Coast Guard, it is surprising that the Philippines 
should be the second most frequent user of mili-
tary and paramilitary actions. Despite Taiwan’s 
ambiguous international legal status, it ranked 
| 11
third in its use of military and law enforcement 
assets to bolster its claims. This is partly because 
Taiwan occupies Taiping Island – the largest of the 
Spratly Islands, also known as Itu Aba – and has 
the largest military presence (both in numbers of 
personnel and the physical features of the military 
infrastructure on the island) in the South China 
Sea, which has to be regularly resupplied.17
S O U T H E A S T A S I A N C L A I M A N T 
E CO N O M I C AC T I O N S
China’s rival claimants almost never utilize 
economic sanctions to defend their maritime terri-
torial claims. The Philippines is the only Southeast 
Asian country to sanction one of its rivals over the 
maritime territorial dispute; Taiwan has occa-
sionally done so as well. China is the biggest user 
of sanctions as a coercive tool against its rivals. 
Southeast Asian countries do sign economic deals 
with third party countries or corporations involv-
ing disputed areas. The most prominent economic 
instrument of claimant states is joint development 
offers (E3). China also regularly undertakes eco-
nomic inducements (E4), sweetening the economic 
pot of a rival claimant in order to obtain favorable 
treatment in a territorial dispute. Its poorer rivals 
rarely use this tactic.
S O U T H E A S T A S I A N C L A I M A N T S A N D 
D I P LO M AC Y 
When it comes to diplomacy, Southeast Asian 
claimant states vary in their approaches to defend-
ing their territorial claims. Smaller claimant states 
such as Malaysia and Brunei tend to allow ASEAN 
to do their talking. Both countries have supported 
ASEAN initiatives related to the resolution of the 
South China Sea dispute but rarely put forward 
their own proposals. Vietnam and the Philippines 
TaiwanBruneiMalaysiaVietnamPhilippinesChina
148
60
13
9
5
32
TABLE 7: TOTAL MILITARY AND PARAMILITARY ACTIONS BY STATE
China’s Tailored Coercion and Its Rivals’ Actions and Responses: 
What the Numbers Tell Usj A N U A R Y 2 0 1 5
12 |
are much more activist in their diplomatic efforts, 
putting forth unilateral proposals and attempting 
to get ASEAN member states to coalesce against 
China. They also sometimes engage China in 
bilateral negotiations. Prior to the summer 2014 
oil rig standoff between China and Vietnam, the 
Vietnamese had only recently concluded bilateral 
talks with China to address the South China Sea 
dispute through negotiations, had agreed to pur-
sue joint development in 2013, and have recently 
resumed those discussions.18 Taiwan’s ambiguous 
international status and limited participation in 
diplomatic venues means that Taiwan rarely uses 
diplomacy to advance or protect its claims.19
Both Vietnam and the Philippines have made 
active attempts to form coalitions within ASEAN 
and at ASEAN-related venues to argue for a bind-
ing code of conduct and resolutions stating that the 
South China Sea is a serious problem requiring col-
lective effort to resolve. China repeatedly thwarted 
their efforts This was evident at the ADMM+ dis-
cussions in Cambodia in 2012 and at the DoC/CoC 
negotiations at the end of 2012. Representatives 
of both the Philippine and Vietnamese govern-
ments, as well as analysts from other Southeast 
Asian countries, have lamented that “weak leader-
ship” within ASEAN has led to that organization’s 
inability to effectively address the South China Sea 
dispute.20 
S O U T H E A S T A S I A N C L A I M A N T S A N D 
L E G A L AC T I O N S
The Southeast Asian claimants have not made 
extensive use of legal actions to support their 
claims in the South China Sea. The Philippines 
has been the most active user of the legal avenue, 
submitting a claim to the International Tribunal 
on Law of the Sea for arbitration in 2013. The 
Philippines has utilized legal tactics more fre-
quently than all other claimants, including China. 
Its seriousness is demonstrated by hiring Paul 
Reichler to represent its case. Reichler represented 
Nicaragua in a landmark case against the United 
States before the International Court of Justice.21 
Other ASEAN states have not, by and large, sought 
legal recourse to address South China Sea dis-
putes. Despite Hanoi’s recent troubles with Beijing 
regarding China’s temporary placement of an oil 
rig within Vietnam’s EEZ, Vietnam has so far cho-
sen not to file a claim with the International Court 
of Justice despite the Philippine government urging 
it to do so.22 Vietnam may be waiting to see the 
outcome of the arbitration between the Philippines 
and China. Other claimant countries have not 
filed legal suits, leading some in the region and 
South China Sea watchers in general to fret that the 
Philippines may be sticking its neck out in directly 
challenging China in this fashion.23
P OT E N T I A L S T R AT E G I E S A N D 
O B J E C T I V E S O F T H E C L A I M A N T 
S TAT E S 
What do these data reveal about the objectives of 
the South China Sea claimant states? The evidence 
presented here only suggests the broader strategies 
being employed to accomplish claimant objec-
tives. It is likely that given China’s heavy use of 
paramilitary forces, its continued involvement 
in diplomatic talks, its participation in selected 
legal venues24, and continued efforts to arrive at 
China’s coercive actions in 
the South China Sea also 
encourage its rivals to believe 
that actively pursuing their 
territorial interests will 
ultimately leave them in 
disadvantaged positions.
| 13
joint economic deals, the Chinese leadership has 
concluded that it either lacks the raw power or that 
the political cost is too high to simply resolve the 
maritime territorial disputes through the overt 
use of force. Furthermore, China’s leadership may 
conclude that the overt use of force is contrary to 
China’s long-term goal of preserving a peaceful 
and stable external environment for the purposes 
of focusing on continued economic development. 
Such a calculus, however, does not prevent China 
from engaging in a long-term strategy of seeking 
to erode American credibility. By taking coercive 
actions against China’s rivals in the South China 
Sea below a threshold in which the United States 
would obviously need to react militarily, China 
appears to be chipping away at the region’s steadfast 
belief that the United States is a reliable guarantor 
of regional security. China’s coercive actions in the 
South China Sea also encourage its rivals to believe 
that actively pursuing their territorial interests 
will ultimately leave them in disadvantaged posi-
tions. Thus, China is biding its time, slowly eroding 
American credibility in the region, changing facts 
on the ground where it believes it can and carefully 
calibrating the coercion of its rivals in the South 
China Sea.
China’s Southeast Asian rivals are pursuing spe-
cific strategies of their own. The smaller states of 
Malaysia and Brunei are pursuing a lay low strategy, 
as the miniscule number of tactical actions pur-
sued by these countries illustrate. When positive 
action is necessary, the smaller claimants tend to 
rely on larger multilateral organizations such as 
ASEAN to lobby for their interests. Malaysia and 
Brunei for example worked with Vietnam and the 
Philippines to release a joint communique express-
ing concern and alarm over China’s May 2014 oil 
drilling activities in Vietnam’s Exclusive Economic 
Zone. As with the other claimants, Malaysia and 
Brunei have significant economic ties with the PRC; 
however, in addition, there are two other factors 
which lead to a quieter approach to dealing with 
China over maritime territorial disputes:25 (1) the 
claimants are at the greatest distance from China; 
and (2) neither Brunei nor Malaysia have strong 
political identities associated with maritime sover-
eignty and maritime territorial claims. Recently, 
the U.S. Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral 
Jonathan Greenert said in a speech to the Carnegie 
Endowment of International Peace that Malaysia 
has invited the United States to station P-8 surveil-
lance aircraft at its naval and air facilities. There 
is some question as to whether Malaysia wanted 
this offer made public, but this is some evidence 
of Malaysia taking a more active defense of its 
claims.26 
Vietnam has taken a multi-layered approach to 
dealing with China’s coercion. It argues that 
bilateral negotiations with China can bring about 
fruitful results, such as the bilateral agreement to 
demarcate the Gulf of Tonkin. Vietnamese inter-
locutors also insist that Vietnam enjoys a special 
party-to-party relationship with China that may 
make it possible to resolve some of the disputes 
through Communist party back channels. 
The Vietnamese have also pursued a coalition-
building strategy within the region. Thus, 
Vietnam is actively attempting to get other mem-
bers of ASEAN to form a united front to establish 
a code of conduct with China and pursue other 
regional confidence building measures.27 
Vietnam has also sought to get the United States 
involved in settling the territorial dispute or 
balancing against China. It has supported U.S. 
statements that cast China as de-stabilizing the 
South China Sea, and more directly, has made 
offers to expand U.S. military access to its bases 
and military facilities.28 Vietnam has actively 
courted India to play a greater role in the South 
China Sea.
Finally, Vietnam has used its military and paramil-
itary forces to patrol its territories, to enhance the 
China’s Tailored Coercion and Its Rivals’ Actions and Responses: 
What the Numbers Tell Usj A N U A R Y 2 0 1 5
14 |
defense of the land features that it occupies, and to 
conduct land reclamation activities. Vietnam has 
engaged in some economic influencing activity of 
its own, as it has shown a willingness to enter into 
third party joint economic deals with Indian and 
other energy companies for access to contested oil 
blocks. 
The Philippines has the most confrontational 
strategy vis-à-vis China. One assessment argues 
that the Philippines has followed a strategy of 
“pitting China’s long-term economic growth 
objectives against its maritime territorial claims.”29 
While our data cannot substantiate such an argu-
ment, they do illustrate several trends. First, 
the Philippines has sought to internationalize 
the dispute by bringing in the United States and 
ASEAN to help settle the dispute. Our examina-
tion of ADMM+ and the DOC/COC negotiations 
reflected this behavior. Second the Philippines is 
the only other country besides China and Taiwan 
to utilize economic coercion (targeting China and 
Taiwan). Third, the Philippines is the most active 
user of legal tactics to protect its claims. Finally, 
the Philippines displayed the second highest use of 
the military and paramilitary forces to advance or 
protect claims, despite having one of the weakest 
militaries in the region. 
Taiwan’s approach is one of the most interesting 
strategies pursued by a South China Sea claim-
ant. Lacking the diplomatic and legal status to file 
claims, Taiwan has had to rely on creative foreign 
policy to protect its claims. In addition to a very 
active military and paramilitary presence, includ-
ing patrolling, the strengthening of structures and 
fortifications on Taiping Island (the largest per-
manent military presence in the South China Sea), 
and the use of its coast guard to arrest trespassing 
fishermen, Taiwan has proposed an international 
conference to resolve the South China Sea dispute 
and has publicly stated that the maritime territo-
rial dispute can be resolved through international 
law.30 The Taiwan government may be consider-
ing clarifying its position on the nine-dashed 
line.31 Taiwan has been careful to not fall into the 
trap of Beijing’s “United Front Tactics,” rejecting 
PRC offers to engage in joint patrolling or other 
combined efforts to promote Chinese maritime 
territorial claims. Taiwan has been one of the most 
active users of strategic communications to get its 
story out. Taiwan is the third most frequent user 
of information tactics to shape domestic and inter-
national opinion. For example, following the 2013 
confrontation when the Philippines Coast Guard 
killed a Taiwan fisherman, Taiwan wasted no time 
in launching a public relations blitz to shape public 
opinion both domestically and internationally.
Lacking the diplomatic and 
legal status to file claims, 
Taiwan has had to rely on 
creative foreign policy to 
protect its claims.
| 15
CONCLUSION
This research on claimant states’ tactics in the 
South China Sea reveals some interesting patterns 
of claimant behavior. China’s economic, political 
and military rise allows Beijing to leverage a wide 
range of tools to protect or advance its maritime 
territorial claims. China is the most frequent 
user of all elements of national power when it 
comes to exerting influence on its rivals, with the 
exception of legal actions. The total number of 
Chinese actions (recorded in the NDU data base) 
falls just short of twice the total number of its 
nearest competitor, the Philippines. Its military 
and paramilitary actions comprise over half of 
such activities dating back to 1995. China is most 
frequent user of information tactics or strategic 
communications in order to shape domestic and 
international public opinion. China uses eco-
nomic actions twice as often as the Philippines, 
its closest rival in this regard. Thus, China has 
both the capability and the will to utilize numer-
ous policy instruments to both influence and 
coerce its rival claimants.
China’s rivals have by no means been compla-
cent. All of the Southeast Asian claimants and 
Taiwan have resorted to military and para-
military instruments to protect or advance their 
claims. Each claimant has also used diplomacy 
to protect and advance its claims. Vietnam and 
the Philippines have been the most active in 
attempting to build coalitions within ASEAN 
to counter-balance diplomatic pressure from 
Beijing. While not as frequent a user of economic 
statecraft as China, the Philippines lavished 
lucrative economic deals upon some of its rivals, 
and also initiated economic sanctions. In addi-
tion to domestic economic benefits that would 
be derived from a deal, and in an effort to “inter-
nationalize” the maritime dispute in the South 
China Sea, both Vietnam and the Philippines 
have signed third party joint economic develop-
ment deals as yet another means to influence 
China. 
A great deal of activity is taking place in the South 
China Sea to protect and advance the interests 
of the various claimants. China is responsible 
for the vast majority of the influence actions, but 
Vietnam, the Philippines, and Taiwan have also 
been active in using various means to press their 
claims. Malaysia and Brunei have adopted a lay 
low approach, recent Malaysian activities not-
withstanding. China’s coercive approach appears 
to limit actions to stay below the threshold that 
might produce a strong counter-China coalition 
including the United States. The case study of the 
Scarborough Shoal, for example, indicates that 
Beijing made much more use of its law enforce-
ment assets than its naval assets. Similarly, in 
diplomatic venues, Beijing has been careful not to 
rule out negotiations or peaceful means to resolve 
disputes, but has insisted that bilateral negotiations 
are the most appropriate way to resolve disputes. 
China agrees in principle that confidence-building 
measures are important for peace and stability in 
the region. But it will not agree to binding codes of 
conduct or restrictions on behaviors that have real 
costs associated with them. Beijing has engaged 
in positive economic actions, including lavishing 
lucrative economic deals on rival claimants and 
has even agreed to joint economic development 
deals in the past. But China has also been quick 
to levy harsh economic sanctions when the posi-
tive economic actions do not bear fruit or when 
other claimants act to challenge China’s maritime 
territorial claims. The bottom line is that China’s 
willingness to engage in coercive behavior appears 
to have a self-imposed upper limit, probably 
because Beijing recognizes that actions beyond that 
threshold would result in significant economic, 
political, diplomatic and military costs. That China 
overtly used lethal force in 1988 to settle a mari-
time territorial dispute with Vietnam, but has not 
done so since, bears repeating. This has signifi-
cant U.S. policy implications which will need to 
be explored further and by other analysts in this 
CNAS effort. 
China’s Tailored Coercion and Its Rivals’ Actions and Responses: 
What the Numbers Tell Usj A N U A R Y 2 0 1 5
16 |
E N D N OT E S
1. For the purposes of this analysis we use the term coercion to reflect those 
actions which imply, as Schelling argued decades ago, punishment, threat 
of punishment, or negative consequences if the recipient of coercion fails 
to comply. In this light, the South China Sea claimants’ use of military and 
paramilitary assets can be readily identified as coercive behavior. In other 
cases, the claimant countries’ use of other instruments of national power can 
also be considered coercive. For example, the use of economic sanctions may 
also be considered coercive, as can the threatened use of the international 
legal system to shape the behavior of a rival. At the same time, however, other 
elements of national power available to the rival claimants should be defined 
as influence elements: tools which can help the country in question influence, 
coax, or shape the behavior of a rival claimant, but should not necessarily be 
defined as coercive. Efforts to “buy off” a rival through lucrative economic 
deals, for example, or entering into joint development arrangements are 
clearly efforts to influence a rival, but are not necessarily coercive. Similarly, 
countries engaging in tough negotiations and coalition politics are also 
attempting to influence the outcomes of international transactions in their 
favor, but these actions are not necessarily coercive by definition. The 
approach of this report, then, is to focus on the claimant countries’ efforts to 
influence the behavior of their rivals, either through clearly coercive means, 
or through other instruments of power meant to shape the behavior of their 
counterparts.
2. Patrick M. Cronin, “The Challenge of Responding to Maritime Coercion” 
(Center for New American Security, September 2014), 1.
3. The actions were identified by searches which included the “South China 
Sea” as the first search term and the individual claimant countries (e.g., China, 
Vietnam, Malaysia) as the second and by searches that focused on specific 
cases, including the 2012 Scarborough Shoal dispute, the 2005-2008 Joint 
Marine Seismic Undertaking between China, the Philippines and Vietnam, and 
the 2012 Philippines case before the International Tribunal on Law of the Sea). 
Once we collected and counted the individual tactical actions, we assessed the 
data for patterns of tactical behavior.
4. We divided diplomatic actions into three sub-categories: coalition 
diplomacy (designated as a “CD” in the table) refers to actions by 
representatives of one of the claimant states to either form or prevent 
coalitions from being formed by rival claimants in diplomatic settings such as 
the ASEAN Defense Ministerial Meeting Plus. Negotiation actions (designated 
as “N” in the table) refer to actions in which the claimants attempt to 
advance or protect their territorial claims by either seeking to resolve the 
dispute through a negotiation/bargaining process or conversely by stalling or 
obstructing the resolution of the dispute diplomatically. Dispute Management 
(designated as “DM” in the table) are actions by the claimant to lower tensions 
and infuse stability in a tense security situation. They are manifested in 
recommendations for confidence building measures and calls for codes of 
conduct.
5. The categories and tactics were developed based on interviews with 
South China Sea experts and representatives from the claimant countries and 
surveys of the academic literature.
6. The data collection for this analysis was concluded in 2013. Since that 
time the claimants have undertaken a number of actions which were not 
collected or analyzed in the NDU data base. These include recent attempts at 
land reclamation, commercial development of occupied land features and of 
course, the spring 2014 confrontation between China and Vietnam when China 
placed an oil rig within Vietnam’s EEZ and surrounded it with law enforcement 
and naval vessels. These activities will be fully collected and assessed in later 
NDU efforts to analyze the claimant tactics in the South China Sea.
7. Military (M) or paramilitary (PM) actions involve the following tactics: (1) 
use of lethal force against a rival in a disputed area; (2) movement of a unit 
into a disputed area; (3) reinforcement of units already present in a disputed 
area; (4) reaction to the movement of rival unit; and (5) withdrawal of units 
from a disputed area.
8. The prevalence of China Maritime Surveillance (CMS) ships strongly 
suggests that this was a deliberate strategy on China’s part. In fact, this 
was verified by one of the author’s interviews with the PLA Navy, the State 
Oceanic Administration, and Chinese scholars with close connections with 
the Chinese government in Beijing and Shanghai in 2012. During those 
interviews the interviewees affirmed that the deliberate placement of law 
enforcement vessels as the “tip of the spear” in maritime territorial defense 
and enforcement missions was a deliberate strategy. This approach keeps the 
Chinese vessels lightly armed, thereby carefully controlling escalation. The 
strategy also pits non-military Chinese units against the militaries or coast 
guards of China’s rivals, which gives China a public relations advantage and 
eliminates the possibility that the PLA Navy would have a direct confrontation 
with the U.S. Navy. At the same time, the use of CMS ships granted Beijing 
a degree of plausible deniability since, Chinese interlocutors asserted, 
independent provocative actions by a CMS ship captain is more convincing 
than independent actions by a PLA Navy ship captain.
9. Christopher Chung, “Southeast Asia and the South China Sea dispute” in 
Security and International Politics in the South China Sea, ed. Sam Bateman 
and Ralf Emmers (New York: Routledge, 2008), 99.
10. Jane Perlez, “Philippines and China Ease Tensions in rift at Sea,” The New 
York Times, June 18, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/19/world/asia/
beijing-and-manila-ease-tensions-in-south-china-sea.html.
11. Ibid.
12. Irwin Loy, “ASEAN Concludes, Exposing South China Sea Rifts,” VOA News, 
July 13, 2012, http://www.voanews.com/content/South-China-Sea-rifts-
exposed-as-ASEAN-meeting-concludes/1404171.html.
13. Ibid; authors’ interviews with selected Southeast Asian diplomats.
14. Hao Zhou, “PRC FM Says China Not in Row with ASEAN,” Global Times, July 
7, 2012.
15. Martin Abbugao, “ASEAN Sharply Split on West Philippine Sea Row,” 
Global Nation Inquirer, July 12, 2012, http://globalnation.inquirer.net/43893/
ASEAN-sharply-split-on-west-Philippine-sea-row/. 
16. Gao Zhiguo, “The Nine-Dash Line in the South China Sea: history, status, 
and implications’, American Journal of International Law, Vol. 107 no. 1 
| 17
(January 2013). Also see “Backgrounder: China’s Stand on South China Sea 
Disputes” Xinhua, December 15, 2014, http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/
china/2014-12/15c-135855926.htm.
17. The Taiwan military has 130 coast guard personnel stationed on Taiping 
Island. Taiping Island also boasts an air field capable of servicing C-130 
aircraft and the only island in the Spratly Island group with a port capable 
of stationing navy surface combatants; in the case of the ROCN, frigates. 
See Zachary Keck, “Taiwan Holds Largest South China Sea Military Drill 
Since 2000,” The Diplomat, May 7, 2014, http://the diplomat.com/2014/05/
Taiwan-holds-largest-south-china-sea-militar-drill-since-2000/.
18. Li Xiaokun and Zhang Yunbei, “Working group to discuss sea issues,” China 
Daily, http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2013-10/14content_17029051.
htm. Also see Keith Bradshaw, “China and Vietnam at Impasse over Rig in 
South China Sea,” The New York Times, May 12, 2014, http://www.nytimes.
com/2014/05/13 world/asia/china-and-vietnam-at-impasse-over-drilling-rig-
in-south-china-sea.html?r=0.
19. Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou has articulated an East China Sea Peace 
Initiative to advance Taiwan’s interests in the East China Sea.
20. Interviews in 2012 and 2013 with analysts and representatives of the 
Embassies of several South China Sea claimant states.
21. Andrew Browne, “Philippines Takes China’s Sea Claims to Court,” The Wall 
Street Journal, October 14, 2013, http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405
2702304330904579135220056016750.
22. Gregory Poling, “Recent Trends in the South China Sea and U.S. Policy” 
(Center for Strategic and International Studies, July 2014), 6.
23. Waldon Bello, “The devil and deep South China Sea” Asia Times, March 20, 
2014, http://www.atimes.com/atimes/southeast_Asia/SEA-02-200314.html.
24. For example, China submitted its claims to the United Nations Commission 
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf in 2009 and submitted a note verbale 
in response to the joint claim submitted by Malaysia and Vietnam. In most 
instances, however, Beijing has refused to participate in international legal 
proceedings related to sovereignty and the South China Sea.
25. For more detail on the “lie low” strategy pursued by some of the 
South China Sea claimants, see Eric Yep and Simon Hall, “Malaysia, China 
keep low profile on conflicting sea claims,” The Wall Street Journal, 
June 24, 2014, http://online.wsj.com/articles/malaysia-china-keep-low 
profile-on-1403622597. 
26. Richard Burgess, “CNO: Malaysia Offers O.S. P-8 Detachment Site,” 
Seapower Magazine, September 8, 2014, http://www.seapowermagazine.org/
stories/20140908-malaysia-p8.html. Also see Trefor Moss, “Malaysia offers to 
host U.S. Navy aircraft,” in The Wall Street Journal, September 12, 2014.
27. Carlyle Thayer, “New Commitment to a code of conduct in the South China 
Sea?” (National Bureau of Asian Research, October 9, 2013), http://nbr.org/
research/activity.aspx?id=360.
28. Erik Slavin, “Changing times: Door may open to U.S. military at former 
Vietnam War hub,” Stars and Stripes, June 18, 2014. Also see Gopal Ratnam, 
Sharon, Chen, and Isabel Reynolds, “Hagel says China’s actions in South China 
Sea Destabilizing,” Bloomberg News, May 31, 2014, http://www.bloomberg.
com/news/2014-05-30/abe-offers-japan-s-support-to-southeast-Asia-on-
sea-disputes.html.
29. Sean Mirski, “Magnetic Rocks, Part II: Assessing the 
Philippines’ Legal Strategy in the South China Sea,” The National 
Interest, May 20, 2014, http://nationalinterest.org/feature/
magnetic-rocks-part-ii-assessing-the-philippines-legal-10493. 
30. Bonnie Glaser, “A Role for Taiwan in Promoting Peace in the South China 
Sea,” Center for Strategic and International Studies website, April 15, 2014, 
http://csis.org/publication/role-taiwan-promoting-peace-south-china-sea. 
31. Interviews with Taiwan Ministry of Defense officials in Washington. The 
likelihood that Taiwan will actually clarify its position is small. President Ma 
and the KMT will want to preserve some ambiguity over this question and not 
abandon larger historical claims. At the same time, Ma’s administration will 
want to put forward a general statement supporting the role of international 
law in resolving the dispute.
About the Center for a 
New American Security
The mission of the Center for a New American 
Security (CNAS) is to develop strong, pragmatic 
and principled national security and defense 
policies. Building on the expertise and 
experience of its staff and advisors, CNAS 
engages policymakers, experts and the public 
with innovative, fact-based research, ideas 
and analysis to shape and elevate the national 
security debate. A key part of our mission is to 
inform and prepare the national security leaders 
of today and tomorrow.
CNAS is located in Washington, and was 
established in February 2007 by co-founders 
Kurt M. Campbell and Michèle A. Flournoy. 
CNAS is a 501(c)3 tax-exempt nonprofit 
organization. Its research is independent and 
non-partisan. CNAS does not take institutional 
positions on policy issues. Accordingly, all views, 
positions, and conclusions expressed in this 
publication should be understood to be solely 
those of the authors. 
© 2015 Center for a New American Security.
All rights reserved.
Center for a New American Security
1152 15th Street, NW 
Suite 950 
Washington, DC 20005
TEL 202.457.9400 
FAX 202.457.9401 
EMAIL info@cnas.org 
www.cnas.org
Production Notes
Soy ink is a helpful component in paper recycling. It helps in this 
process because the soy ink can be removed more easily than 
regular ink and can be taken out of paper during the de-inking 
process of recycling. This allows the recycled paper to have less 
damage to its paper fibers and have a brighter appearance. 
The waste that is left from the soy ink during the de-inking 
process is not hazardous and it can be treated easily through 
the development of modern processes.
Paper recycling is reprocessing waste paper fibers back into 
a usable paper product.
1152 15th Street, NW
Suite 950
Washington, DC 20005
STRONG, PRAGMATIC AND PRINCIPLED 
NATIONAL SECURITY AND DEFENSE POLICIES
TEL 202.457.9400
FAX 202.457.9401
EMAIL info@cnas.org
www.cnas.org
Printed on Post-Consumer Recycled paper with Soy Inks
