Analysis on China's Cyber Threats to Taiwan's Critical Infrastructure in 2025
ROC National Security Bureau (NSB)
China's cyber army has long been engaging in cyberattacks against Taiwan's critical infrastructure (CI) by employing diverse and evolving tactics. To enhance public understanding on the development of emerging cybersecurity threats, the National Security Bureau (NSB) has recently compiled the report titled "Analysis on China's Cyber Threats to Taiwan's Critical Infrastructure in 2025."
Taiwan's national intelligence community identified a large number of information security incidents in 2025. On average, China's cyber army launched 2.63 million intrusion attempts per day targeting Taiwan's CI across nine primary sectors, namely administration and agencies, energy, communications and transmission, transportation, emergency rescue and hospitals, water resources, finance, science parks and industrial parks, as well as food. This figure marks a 6% increase compared to that of 2024. Among them, energy and emergency rescue/hospitals sectors experienced the most significant year-on-year surge in cyberattacks from Chinese threat actors.
China's cyberattacks have been conducted in conjunction with political and military coercive actions. In 2025, relevant hacking and intrusion operations against Taiwan demonstrated a certain extent of correlation with the joint combat readiness patrols carried out by the People's Liberation Army. In addition, China would ramp up hacking activities during Taiwan's major ceremonies, the issuances of important government statements, or overseas visits by high-level Taiwanese officials. Notably, the cyberattacks targeting Taiwan peaked in May of 2025, the first anniversary of President Lai's inauguration.
Cyberattacks conducted by China's cyber army involve four major tactics, namely hardware and software vulnerability exploitation, distributed denial-of-service (DDoS), social engineering, and supply chain attacks. In particular, attacks exploiting hardware and software vulnerabilities accounted for more than half of China's hacking operations, underscoring China's growing efforts to strengthen the operational capacity of vulnerability weaponization.
The top five Chinese hacker groups, namely BlackTech (黑科技),
Flax Typhoon (亞麻颱風), Mustang Panda (野馬熊貓), APT41, and UNC3886, launched cyber operations against Taiwan's CI focusing on five primary sectors, including energy, healthcare, communications and transmission, administration and agencies, as well as technology. In particular, the hacking methods included intensive probing of network equipment and industrial control systems of Taiwan's energy companies, and implantation of malware. The threat actors also employed ransomware to compromise the operation of major hospitals, and sold data stolen from medical institutions on dark web forums. In 2025, at least 20 cases were identified.
Meanwhile, China's cyber army exploited vulnerabilities in the network equipment of Taiwan's telecom industry, and hacked into networks of service providers and subcontractors to infiltrate sensitive and backup communication links. The threat actors also sent highly-tailored social engineering emails to specific agencies of Taiwan's central government. Moreover, aside from Taiwan's science parks, the hacking activities were also extended to upstream, midstream, and downstream suppliers in the semiconductor and defense sectors. Those campaigns sought to steal advanced technologies, industrial plans, and decision-making intelligence.
Throughout 2025, cybersecurity agencies and intelligence services across the Indo-Pacific region, NATO, and the European Union repeatedly identified China as a primary source of global cybersecurity threats. Additionally, China has fully integrated military, intelligence, industrial, and technological capabilities across both public and private sectors to enhance the depth of intrusion and operational stealth of its external cyberattacks through a wide range of cyberattack tactics and techniques. In response to China's cyber threats, the NSB will continue to work with the national intelligence community and relevant government agencies through the established joint defense and reporting mechanisms on information security, so as to report and address China's cyberattacks in a timely manner.
In 2025, the NSB convened information security dialogues and technical conferences with over 30 countries worldwide. By cooperating closely with international friends and allies, the NSB strives to obtain timely intelligence on attack patterns of China's cyber army. Furthermore, through international cooperation networks on information security, the NSB conducts joint investigations into malicious relay nodes, thereby supporting government decision making, response preparedness, and further enhancing the overall resilience and capacity of Taiwan's CI protection. The NSB urges the public to prioritize information security, remain vigilant against China's cyber threats, and work collectively to safeguard Taiwan's overall cybersecurity.
For more information, please refer to
Secretariat
National Security Bureau
Republic of China (Taiwan)
January 3, 2026
